When in 2012 the buzzy new singer Frank Ocean said he’d fallen in love with a man, the admission was a landmark: Mainstream pop, R&B, and rap—the genres Ocean was deftly bridging—were still overwhelmingly straight. In a grateful letter to Ocean, the writer and filmmaker dream hampton put his news in perspective: “You’re a Black man in America whose star is on the rise, working in hip-hop and soul, where gender constructs are cartoonishly fixed. Your colleague Drake is often attacked with homophobic slurs when he simply displays vulnerability in his music. He seems to respond by following those moments of real emotion with bars that put ‘hoes’ in their proverbial place.” The rapturous response to Ocean’s debut album, Channel Orange, then proved that queerness need not be a career breaker.

The text of Ocean’s coming-out statement—like hampton’s words above—also implied that his reckoning with his sexuality might have musical, not just social, implications. In his open letter, Ocean described confessing his attraction to a close friend (“He did his best, but he wouldn’t admit the same. He had to go back inside soon, it was late and his girlfriend was waiting for him upstairs. He wouldn’t tell the truth about his feelings for me for another 3 years”). Ocean’s epiphany, that this was his first love, made him reminisce “about the sentimental songs I enjoyed when I was a teenager. The ones I played when I experienced a girlfriend for the first time. I realised [sic] they were written in a language I did not yet speak.”

As an artist, Ocean has offered a new take on the “sentimental” tradition that he referred to. Themes of love, sex, nostalgia, and loneliness were rendered in a classic kind of croon, but with an enigmatic, cliché-averse perspective. By the time of his 2016 masterpiece, Blond(e), Ocean had helped transform the sound of popular music into something hazier and more introspective, with ever more liquid boundaries between rapping and singing. That album’s achingly strange songs were governed not by pop structures but by emotional logic, and his lyrics often described feeling between. That he slipped between pronouns to describe the objects of his obsessions somehow felt both incidental and integral to that approach.

Influence is a tricky thing to define, and it’s too simplistic to say that many of the rising young men writing songs adjacent to hip-hop and R&B sound like Ocean, even if many of them really do seem to imitate him. What’s more important is they often appear to think like him. They stake their stardom on idiosyncrasy, vibes, and visions expressed in cohesive, album-length wholes and fascinating micro-moments rather than tidy songs. Ocean’s take on sexuality is becoming less unusual, too, with inevitable implications for the performance of masculinity in music. Queerness is not required for, nor does it ensure, a questing sensibility. But they often seem to go together.

The 21-year-old Compton guitarist and singer Steve Lacy sings with smoothness and casual swagger, but that’s as far as his sonic resemblance to Ocean goes. They’re affiliated with the same scene, though. A gifted producer, Lacy has contributed wandering, loopy tones as a member of the Grammy-winning R&B group The Internet—whose founder, Syd, was once the only openly gay member of Odd Future, the L.A. rap collective that Ocean was also part of. Lacy’s debut solo album, Apollo XXI, out last week, has the feel of a scrapbook or tone-poem collection, with songs that are pert, funky, and dappled with California light. It’s shaggy, yet it hangs together; it’s loose, yet detail-packed; and it lends itself to the backgrounds of barbecues or to close listening.

It’s also informed by queerness. Lacy identifies as bisexual and traces his awakening back to being kissed by a guy on New Year’s Eve 2017 (Lacy initially recoiled, but then came on to the friend and was rejected, according to his account). His music was relaxedly raunchy on his 2017 EP Steve Lacy’s Demo, but now it is so in a more omnidirectional way. There’s a “girl” on his lead single, “N Side,” whose chorus repeatedly asks, “Is it inside?” But for the breeze-in-hair anthem “Hate CD,” he yearns for “his affection.” The “Outro Freestyle” has Lacy rapping, “You be talking ’bout the pussy, pussy, you don’t hit it / You be sucking dick, you be, you be sucking dick.” Given the context, what might seem like a homophobic diss becomes something more ambiguous. So unbothered is Lacy’s delivery throughout that it’s easy to miss the ways in which he’s playing with gender. But why should he be bothered? It’s 2019, and his generation is, in greater and greater numbers, ditching the binary.

The truth is, though, there are still plenty of reasons for an artist to have anxiety about lyrics like these, as Lacy recognizes on the nine-minute reckoning of Apollo XXI’s second song, “Like Me.” “This is about me and what I am,” he begins. “I didn’t wanna make it a big deal.” Yet what unfurls makes clear that it—sexuality—has had to be a big deal. Over itchy rhythms and queasy chords, he speak-sings about seeing “energy” rather than “gender,” before clapping back at people wanting a list of men and women he’s slept with (maybe it’s a reference to when Lacy received blowback for saying he wasn’t attracted to black men, betraying him as having a blinkered outlook all too familiar in the gay world). “How many out there just like me?” he asks in the chorus. “How many others not gon’ tell their family?” The message is straightforward—verging on didactic—but the song, dying and reinventing itself multiple times, isn’t. He’s working a problem over in his head, and it’s a thrill to hear that translated to music.

Lacy’s album arrives a week after the latest from Tyler, the Creator, a collaborator of both Lacy’s and Ocean’s. Tyler first drew notoriety in 2009 as the leader of the infuriatingly irresistible troublemakers in Odd Future, whose sound was most defined by Tyler’s deep rasp delivering murder fantasies and hate speech. He was an art-school teen raised on Eminem’s trolling tactics, but as time wore on, the art-school side came more to the fore. With his impressive 2015 album, Cherry Bomb, Tyler began to present himself more as a sonic sculptor and emotional expressionist. Then, on 2017’s lush Flower Boy, the man once maligned for relying on the word faggot did something yet more surprising: rap about being attracted to men.

Flower Boy tracks such as the woozy “Garden Shed” did the job of Ocean’s “Bad Religion” in 2012 and Lacy’s “Like Me” in 2019, documenting a fight with the closet door. “Truth is, since a youth kid, thought it was a phase,” Tyler rapped. “Thought it’d be like the phrase; ‘poof,’ gone / But, it’s still goin’ on.” Other songs dropped lines about crushing on Leonardo DiCaprio and kissing boys, and the music ranged from clattering, fast-paced raps to spaced-out vision quests. But only with this month’s follow-up album, Igor, has Tyler used his full and diverse arsenal of techniques to talk about same-sex love on its own terms—as a psychodrama less about repression than about romance.

Tyler has long cultivated alter egos in his work, and for this album, his character is the namesake of Dr. Frankenstein’s assistant. An ugly, menacing haunted-house synth note sounds for 35 seconds at the album’s start. Breakbeats crash in. A modern opera is beginning. For much of the album, Tyler’s voice is pitch-shifted from its signature growl to a high, cutesy whine. Rather than rapping much, he sings in off-kilter soul styles like a George Clinton imitator. The cut-and-paste motif of the album art continues through the arrangements, which are thick with samples and chopped-up vocals across goosebump-making chord changes. It sounds nothing like Ocean or Lacy, but, as with them, this is absolutely the sound of being inside someone’s head.

That someone’s story, at least to my ear, is pretty straightforward. At the beginning of the album, Igor is besotted with some boy. That boy has a girlfriend. Igor pleads. They have a dalliance. A woman reenters the picture. The dalliance ends. There’s rage, sadness, and acceptance. As ever, Tyler is a master at conveying neurosis—in its hopeful form, in its despondent form, and in the form that staggers between both poles. “What the fuck is your motive? / Man, I wish you would call me by your name,” he raps on the standout “I Think,” adding, “’Cause I’m sorry / This is not apology.” In the background, a marching refrain—“Four! Skate!”—recalls the guards in The Wizard of Oz.

If the openness to same-sex love would seem to undo Tyler’s old, un-PC image, he’s still got a savage and troubling side. In the middle of the album, his jealousy toward his beloved’s girlfriend takes the form of murderous anger, and all of a sudden it’s like it’s 2009 again, and Tyler is fantasizing about violence against women. The bloodthirst passes, though, and the narrator starts to mellow. “You never lived in your truth, I’m just happy I lived in it,” he sings in “Gone, Gone / Thank You,” in which he seems to make peace with his heartbreak, but also vows to never love again. You never lived in your truth—this is the language of identity confusion and closeting. But it could also be used to describe a lover, of any persuasion, too timid to follow his or her heart.

Back in 2012, Ocean’s coming-out note began like this: “Whoever you are. Wherever you are … I’m starting to think we’re a lot alike.” The statement of universality is an appealing one, and as folks like Ocean, Tyler, and Lacy sing loss, longing, and sex across genders, the message holds. Anyone can relate. Yet still, there are specifically queer dynamics that emerge across these albums and the stories behind them: the struggle for self-acceptance and against social disapproval, the possibility of being attracted to someone who fundamentally can’t requite, the conflicted relationship with internalized machismo. There’s no subgenre to be identified here, just freedom to be admired, resulting in music chock-full of creative decisions that only these particular creators would make, and tales only they can tell.



Midway through last night’s sixth and deciding game of the NBA Finals against the Golden State Warriors, the Toronto Raptors’ star forward Kawhi Leonard sized things up from the top of the three-point arc. Leonard—6 feet 7 inches tall and 230 pounds, with wide hands and a stony expression—took two hard dribbles to the rim, jump-stopped, and rose for a layup, but the Warriors center Kevon Looney arrived to deliver a hard foul. Leonard muscled through the contact and made the shot anyway, extending the Raptors’ three-point lead and embodying, for a moment, a team-wide theme: of hard work done simply, of advantages unflashily accrued.

By the end of the night, the Raptors had won, 114–110, to take the series four games to two, claiming the first championship in the franchise’s 24-year history and the first NBA title for any team outside the United States. Leonard was awarded Finals MVP, having averaged 28 points and almost 10 rebounds to go along with two steals and one block. Watching him tally these statistics was like watching a well-drilled student work lines of algebra.

As the distinguishing traits of champions go, readiness is not a particularly scintillating one. This is doubly true in the context of recent NBA history, which has taken on the feel of a space race. The Stephen Curry/Kevin Durant/Klay Thompson Warriors have spent the past few years inverting the court, making the far reaches beyond the three-point line the crucial territory, and their competitors have mostly tried to match their boldness, if not their specific strategy. LeBron James assembled a superstar conglomerate in Cleveland and has attempted the same in Los Angeles; the Houston Rockets have run basketball through algorithms. Contemporary thinking says the way to win a title is by reimagining the game.

There is something simultaneously retro and radical, then, about this Toronto team. Since the arrival in 2013 of the team president Masai Ujiri, the Raptors have improved steadily but incrementally. They’ve built around Kyle Lowry, a point guard more suited to hard-nosed defense than three-point heroics. They drafted Pascal Siakam, a springy, rail-thin forward who didn’t start playing basketball until age 15 and who has suddenly, three years into his pro career, become the team’s second-leading scorer. Last off-season, Ujiri traded DeMar DeRozan, an adept mid-range shooter and beloved local figure, to the San Antonio Spurs for Leonard, one of the league’s premier offensive and defensive forces (the move carried risk, as Leonard had feuded with the Spurs’ management and had only one year left on his contract). In February, Ujiri swung a deal for Marc Gasol, a center as comfortable launching jumpers and slinging crosscourt passes as patrolling the paint. No Toronto player was drafted higher than 15th, an unheard-of condition for an NBA finalist.

The resulting array of talent came to reflect something of its designer. If this Finals may be remembered for the limping end of the Warriors’ dynasty—the injuries to Durant (a strained calf and then a torn Achilles tendon) and Thompson (hamstring, then ACL), the overburdened Curry unable to compensate—it also demonstrated Toronto’s aptitude for seizing opportunity in whichever form it presented itself. “They played unselfishly and they played defense,” the head coach Nick Nurse, himself a first-year hire, said from the trophy-presentation podium postgame. “That’s a pretty good combination.”

The Raptors hounded the Warriors’ remaining healthy stars, forcing the ball into the hands of shot-averse players and, on the other end of the court, leveraging straightforward pick-and-rolls and post-ups into open looks. In Game 1, Siakam made 14 of 17 shots for 32 points; in Game 4, Leonard bullied his way to 36; last night, Lowry scored the team’s first 11 points. The backup guard Fred VanVleet, an undrafted player out of Wichita State University, emerged as a folk hero, shadowing Curry on defense and knocking in timely three-pointers whenever they seemed most needed.

One effect of having all these fresh faces—and returning ones; Leonard won the Finals MVP award once before, with the Spurs in 2014—on the NBA’s championship stage was the shaking-up of what had become a tedious LeBron James–versus-Warriors early-summer tradition. The series took on uncommon character. Game 5 saw Golden State pull off a miraculous last-second comeback following Durant’s Achilles injury; Game 6 featured archetypes unavailable to the past few NBA Finals, challengers on the precipice against depleted champions mounting a prideful stand. New figures meant new peripheral reveals, too. Fans delighted at the discovery that Leonard’s trash talk, such as it is, mirrors his pared-to-essentials style of play. College teammates, chased down for between-game fodder, reported that his go-to phrases were clipped and direct: “No” on defense, “Buckets” on offense, the comparatively effusive “Board man gets paid” after a rebound.

More broadly, the Finals signaled the start of a league-wide shift, an end to Golden State’s dominance, if not its relevance. The Warriors will be without the injured Durant and Thompson for at least the better part of next season, and possibly forever—both players are free to leave the team in the summer if they choose. The roster that remains figures to be good but no longer prohibitively favored. The strategic stakes of the league, set for the past half decade by the Warriors, are now a little less urgent. Competing for a title no longer means developing a credible plan to unseat one of the most skilled and pedigreed teams in the sport’s history. That last night’s was the final NBA game played in Oakland’s Oracle Arena—the Warriors will be moving across the bay to a new building in San Francisco next season—has an end-of-an-era resonance.

Toronto might also look different at the start of next season. Leonard, who during the process of leaving San Antonio expressed a preference for teams in his native California, declined to say during the championship celebration whether he intended to resign, and the snakebit Washington Wizards, even as confetti still floated in the air, were reported to be pursuing Ujiri. The Raptors seem unlikely to coalesce into a dynasty; it took an anomaly of physics for them to make it out of the second round. They were built to give themselves a chance, and they’ve proved that doing so is worth it, that titles don’t land with only the sport’s well-stocked futurists. After the locker-room celebration, with goggles on his forehead and champagne soaking his T-shirt, Leonard spoke to the virtues of simplicity. “I just came in with the right mind-set,” he said. “Let’s go out and win ball games.”



A couple, their marriage on the rocks, walk into a bar.

What sounds like the beginning of an uncomfortable joke is actually the premise—and the entirety—of State of the Union, a sharp, 10-episode relationship comedy written by the author Nick Hornby and directed by Stephen Frears, who’d previously adapted Hornby’s novel High Fidelity. Airing on SundanceTV, every episode lasts just about 10 minutes, takes place at the same bar, and hits the same beats: Tom (played by Chris O’Dowd) and Louise (Rosamund Pike)—and all their emotional baggage—meet at the pub across the street from their marriage counselor’s office for a quick drink before their weekly session. Tom gets a beer, Louise a glass of white wine. They try (and usually fail) to chat about their “agenda.” They notice the clock. They rush to make it to therapy.

All in all, Tom and Louise’s story wraps up in less than two hours, making it the latest in a growing trend of TV productions experimenting with bite-size, web-series-like run times. This year alone, Netflix debuted the animated anthology Love, Death & Robots, which ran episodes ranging from six to 17 minutes long, and the autobiographical drama Special, which played out in 12- to 17-minute increments.

State of the Union, though, is notable for being disciplined in both its time constraint and its storytelling (the viewer never follows Tom and Louise into their therapist’s office, never sees their children, and never glimpses their London lives outside of these brief pre-counseling meet-ups). And for the most part, it succeeds. The subject matter—a long marriage complicated by unemployment (his) and infidelity (hers)—is perfect for such scrutiny: Think of Richard Linklater’s approach to his Before trilogy, which checked in on a romance every nine years, or of David Nicholls’s novel One Day, which followed a couple-in-the-making on the same day over the course of two decades.

These stories are as rewarding as they are withholding. By showing only slices of the protagonists’ lives, the audience is tasked with looking out for changes in their dynamic. It’s like a game of Spot the Difference. In one episode, Louise sits next to Tom instead of across from him—have they reconciled? In another, Tom’s put on a suit—is he out of his rut? Romantic relationships welcome these questions, and State of the Union tempts viewers, likely armed with their own insights into the trickiness of love, to care about these evolutions-in-miniature.

In Tom and Louise’s case, the viewer has plenty to pick apart from the weekly 10-minute slices, which are filled with colorful, quippy conversations. They take tangents: One episode’s conversation veers into a debate over Brexit; another, a diatribe on Call the Midwife. They’re believably eager to avoid broaching the topic of their relationship without employing metaphors. (In an especially amusing aside in Episode 3, Tom equates their waned passion with keys and pens—“something you lose”—which prompts an entire discussion about whether they’d prefer to be keys, which get found, or pens, which can be easily replaced.) And when they’re out of figurative language, the silence between them often conveys even more about their unease.

Frears keeps the visual language fresh, too, with playful camera angles and seamless one-shots following the pair whenever they cross the street. And O’Dowd and Pike are more than up to the challenge of a 10-part two-hander: They carry the rhythmic dialogue deftly and beautifully, capturing the complex chemistry of a married couple dealing with more than they ever thought they would.

Ironically, some elements of State of the Union need a little more time: In the middle installments, as the novelty of the format wears off and the couple’s rapport barely changes between sessions, Hornby writes time-filling, wheel-spinning exchanges that, albeit realistic, fail to deepen either protagonist’s characterization. Tom and Louise also just aren’t that interesting. They’re almost painfully normal as a couple: He’s unemployed and something of a slob, while she’s overwhelmed from running the house and looking after their children. As characters, they feel true to life and plucked directly off the streets of a London suburb. But as the subjects of a probing, small-screen case study, their ordinariness begins to grate. By the end of the series, the takeaway veers from illuminating to cliché: Marriage, it turns out, is hard work.

Still, these are quibbles. The short format lends itself naturally to creativity of story: The couple can talk about anything, without the pressure of a therapist present and without the pressures of daily life; they’ve got only 10 minutes to catch up—10 minutes they probably rarely get to have. No wonder Hornby is interested in making a second season with a different therapy-going couple. He already has a few options he could use: Tom and Louise, in the moments when they can’t figure out what to say to each other, gaze out of the pub’s windows and watch other couples exit their counselor’s office. Early on, they spy on a dramatic fight between a pair about their age. Later, they observe a much older couple reconciling as they leave.

Either way, Hornby should have no trouble dreaming up more shaky marriages to inspect. The real challenge is whether he can find one that says something a little more unexpected.



By Heart is a series in which authors share and discuss their all-time favorite passages in literature. See entries from Jonathan Franzen, Amy Tan, Khaled Hosseini, and more.

In her new memoir, Flash Count Diary: Menopause and the Vindication of Natural Life, the author Darcey Steinke renders menopause as “a rupture, a metamorphosis, an all-encompassing and violent change.” Its physical intensity makes the experience so fearsome and bewildering, she writes; but equally disorienting is the lack of adequate cultural narratives devoted to making sense of it.

In a conversation for this series, Steinke explained how she turned to the animal kingdom for guidance when the world of human culture wouldn’t suffice. Her search for a menopausal role model brought her not to a writer or filmmaker, but to killer whales: a highly social, matriarchal species in which the females also go through menopause. Steinke followed her newfound obsession first to the Miami aquarium, where an orca named Lolita lives in captivity, and then to a kayak trip in search of Granny, a whale swimming wild in Canada’s Salish Sea. The whales’ example, she found, provides a clarifying counterpoint to women’s destabilizing transformation. We discussed the way animals usefully refract elements of the human experience, and how her quest formed the basis of a book she likens to a feminist retelling of Moby-Dick.

Steinke is the author of five novels, including Sister Golden Hair, Milk, and Jesus Saves. She lives in Brooklyn and spoke with me by phone.

Darcey Steinke: There are very few good books about menopause. Going through this difficult transformation—hot flashes, insomnia, disorientation—I found there was so little in the culture that was able to guide me, to help me make sense of my experience. The Change, by Germaine Greer, is quite good. I also think the novel Break of Day, by Colette, is probably the best novel ever written about menopause. But there’s also a lot of schlock.

What inspired me most was seeing an article in The New York Times about the creatures who go through menopause: human women and female killer whales [as well as short-finned pilot whales]. That fascinated me. I started to read everything I could and watch whale videos on YouTube. That was how I discovered Lolita, a killer whale who has been kept in captivity for 49 years at an amusement park in Florida—decade after decade spent in the same small concrete cell, where she’s forced to perform tricks for crowds. Something about those videos struck me as profoundly sad, and they affected me deeply.

If you don’t know anything about killer whales, which are otherwise known as orcas, you might assume Lolita is happy in her tank. But I probably read 50 books about them. I learned that orcas have brains that are nearly four times as big as ours, and their brains have spindle cells, which are the cells linked to empathy. The children never disperse from the mother, so the family remains the same their whole lives. These pods tend to include up to about 40 whales who spend their whole lives within inches of each other. They swim together, hunt together, and are just completely communal. When a baby is born, all the females gather around the birth almost like midwives, helping and sometimes even pulling the baby out. They have high culture and low culture, even fads. I read about one example where one whale was seen carrying around a dead salmon as a toy, and soon this fad swept the entire local orca population, and after a month it was gone.

So as I learned more, the idea of keeping a social, emotionally intelligent animal alone in captivity like that began to seem unthinkably cruel. There is one video where a newscaster plays Lolita the sounds of her pod, and Lolita sticks her head up out of the water and listens so carefully, the way a captive person might if you played sounds of their family talking at dinner. I guess the tragedy is that she has no way to be her own authentic self—she’s reduced to being a caricature playing a part in a skit for people’s amusement. And I think there must have been some kinship there, because I felt I was losing my natural me-ness. I’m in my late 50s, so as I’d moved into this time, I definitely felt like I was being mentally and culturally held captive by this idea of a postmenopausal hag or something—this idea controlled by all these outside forces.

I wasn’t a big animal person to start with. I used to say, “When all the people are taken care of, then we can take care of the animals.” But I became obsessed with Lolita. I learned that there are many different groups working to get her released, though I can’t vouch for the viability of some of these activist plans to bring a captured animal back to the ocean. And at some point, I decided I was going to go down to Miami and see her.

It was a terrible experience. Everyone is cheering; the music is so loud. And you know that this amazing creature, as vital as she is, has been hollowed out by suffering; years ago, her partner died by slamming his head against the wall of the tank. The whole thing was so upsetting—one of those moments when you’re crying, when you’re angry, when you almost don’t even know what you’re feeling. The next day, I stood with the protesters in the parking lot, trying to turn cars away from the aquarium. It was a very diverse group, ranging from housewives who just think it’s wrong to hard-core animal activists, and we cheered first in English and then in Spanish. At first, I was a little embarrassed. But I was reeling emotionally from the experience of seeing Lolita, and it helped to have a place to put some of that energy.

I think I became so fixated on those whales because I couldn’t find a human role model to help make sense of what was happening to my body. “Storylessness,” the feminist author Katha Pollitt once wrote, “has been women’s big problem”—and that was my problem, too. I lacked a specific sort of menopausal spirit guide. And so I latched onto killer whales instead.

Ultimately my interest led me to the Salish Sea, to an orca matriarch named J2, who was part of the Southern Resident J, L, and K pods of wild whales studied for menopause—the same pod Lolita was taken from. It was a real voyage to go and see them. I had to take a plane across the country, to a van four hours up the coast, to a two-hour ferry ride to the island, and then get in a sea kayak and paddle 10 miles out. But I ultimately got to see J2, [also known as] Granny, and be just a few feet from her. I got to look right into her eyes. And the thing is, it was not a moment of holy union. You don’t want to make the Born Free mistake—I love the animal; the animal loves me. The main feeling I got from the expression in her eyes was, What the fuck are you doing?

It was a look of contempt. But I valued that contempt so much. Because I lacked human stories, I just felt I had to grasp onto that animal story—even if I knew that identification would always be one-sided, could never be complete. I just wanted to get a feel for what it felt like to be a middle-aged animal. It’s not completely triumphant; they have their own struggles. But we have one thing that they lack, which is all the patriarchal bullshit. Killer whales live in a matriarchy, and no one’s lumping onto them these terrible ideas of what it means to be an aging woman.

It was hard for me not to see myself as a kind of Ishmael, seeking out my whale. Moby-Dick is a book that I love, one that always inspired me so deeply. Part of that is the role of the sea: the idea that when Ishmael is feeling depressed and run-down he needs to “get to sea as soon as [he] can.” I always think of that line when I’m checking my phone too much and I just feel rattled by the modern world and I want to sink deep down into the sea of myself—the place where I can do the work I was meant to do with my life. I identify so much with this idea of going as far and as deep as you can into yourself and trying to bring something back.

There’s one passage I love in particular, as Ishmael’s ship, the Pequod, is going down:

Round and round, then, and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axis of that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve. Till, gaining that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and now, liberated by reason of its cunning spring, and, owing to its great buoyancy, rising with great force, the coffin life-buoy shot lengthwise from the sea, fell over, and floated by my side.

I love the idea that the coffin saves him. In this moment of intense, downward pressure, the coffin shoots up from the bottom and becomes his life raft. There’s something to that. Menopause has some pretty hard things about it physically. There can be a kind of physical desperation. But in a weird way, accepting that—really accepting that your mortality is closer than it was—is the insight that might actually save you.

Trying to get that feeling of sinking deep down into yourself is difficult. When I really want to make that space, I leave my phone at home and take a Walkman from the ’90s and my headphones, and I’ll go to Prospect Park, which is close to where I live in Brooklyn. I am so grateful to that park, for its wildness and weirdness. I try to do a kind of walking meditation, where you spend time looking at the shapes of leaves, trying actively not to think too much about yourself, paying attention to the animals. You see the most beautiful things when you look closely. This year, for the first time ever, I learned to recognize the fledgling birds, the ones that were just born this spring. They look almost like adults, but the robins will have a more speckled breast. Or when you see a sparrow feeding another sparrow, the one being fed might look like an adult, but that means it’s a baby. It feels so powerful to notice something like that.

I know these behaviors we witness among animals don’t necessarily mean what we think they mean. We project ourselves onto it. But there is something profound and wide-reaching in that. There is pleasure in seeing these other creatures and knowing that you are equally part of the earth.



This post contains major spoilers for Her Smell.

The prophecy is old: The rocker must die. At least the staggering-about, sensorially scrambled, substance-soaked rocker that fame so often visits must die—or so pop culture seems to want to believe. On some level, A Star Is Born must have been remade so many times because it confirms this. For years of Amy Winehouse’s career, people placed bets on when she would die. With each recent shocking overdose—Lil Peep, Mac Miller—came a public mourning process that spotlighted the ways in which they weren’t, fully, shocks. Musicians often leave behind songs seeming to have predicted their doom. Given how convinced society seems to be that artists’ addictions only spiral downward, it’d almost be weird if they hadn’t considered that same idea in their art.

Becky knows she must die. “I always flirt with death,” goes the first lyric that the fictional ’90s indie-rock front woman—a Courtney Love act-alike played by Elisabeth Moss—sings in Alex Ross Perry’s Her Smell. Via a shaman she has on retainer, she has a vision that her infant daughter will be her “downfall.” Later in the movie, after Becky has vomited in front of that daughter, tried to stab a bandmate, and bled before a crowd, she says that she always assumed she would die onstage. Her family members and bandmates appear to have assumed similarly. When she disappears right before a crucial gig, her ex and her mother sigh, shake their heads, and talk about how the end of Becky’s story might have finally arrived.

But Becky lives. She gets sober. She embraces motherhood and plays a reunion show with her friends and former nemeses. Perversely, this happy ending is what allows Her Smell to be a supremely challenging viewing experience. Perry has nearly inverted the Jackson Maine plotline in A Star Is Born into something that’s uglier but more hopeful, and maybe even more helpful. Becky’s worst moments are revolting, unromantic, and seemingly unforgivable. But she’s redeemed.

Most of the movie unfolds with nausea-inducing camerawork in the crusty bowels of venues and a hall-of-mirrors-like recording studio. Becky flutters around rooms, leaving behind corkscrew trails of confrontations in the form of compliments and petting or insults and violence. You can tell she has been a master manipulator, but no one around her appears susceptible to her charms by the time the film begins. They’re just trying to hang on. Becky’s band, Something She, has begun to lose its ability to draw a crowd because Becky has canceled so many concerts. One bandmate, Ali (Gayle Rankin), reports that the singer fired her twice on this tour and woke up with no memory of doing so.

The movie’s two hours are essentially made up of five jumbo scenes: three of Becky in a frenzy, two of her in recovery. The long-take format relies a lot on Moss, and she delivers with a 52-card-pickup blast of a performance. Becky gasps, screams, and bites, but the most chilling moments aren’t in her meltdowns. They’re in her faux-intimate, super-sarcastic whispers. They’re in the way she jerks from one persona to another, Linda Blair–like. Whatever forces are controlling her—meth or mania or both (drug use is mostly left off-camera)—can amp her into a near-Shakespearean register. “Silly me, I lost a drummer on the way to grandmother’s house,” she says seductively to a band of younger women who showed up to the studio that Becky had refused to vacate. “I thought we’d have to scrap paper and go home. And what should happen instead? Three witches come to my rescue!”

The other characters do not speak with such verve; rather, they’re mostly commiserating about Becky’s awfulness. Or else they’re trying and failing to shame her into acting right. This dynamic makes for one of the movie’s many aesthetic and moral asymmetries. Most of the characters are like people trying to nag a hurricane down to a tropical storm, and it’s as frustrating to watch as that sounds. But Perry deserves credit for caring about the folks in Becky’s orbit; her entropy is almost less the point than its damage. The lawsuits that pile up against her reflect genuine grievances, whether from the manager who’s nearly bankrupted by her antics or from the ex who’s been left to raise their daughter alone.

When rock bottom comes, it’s gnarly, and it’s performative: She’s filmed by a documentary crew, and her final fugue ends with her onstage. She’s being encouraged to act this way, or at least she’s using the audience to justify her behavior. Recovery comes far from the rock environs, in a calm and orderly country home, and Becky tells visitors that her monstrousness was intrinsic to her ability to perform. But what really pulls her into lucidity is the simple, humane epiphany that other people matter. Her daughter reenters the picture. At the comeback concert, she tells the crowd, “It took me a lifetime to realize that without people like these women up here beside me, nobody is nothing.”

Perry is correcting old ideas of rises and falls here. The archetype of the immolating rock god relies on ideas of sole greatness and sole torment: a person succumbing to “inner demons” as the world watches. That they might be saved by others—or, moreover, that they might be saved by caring for others—isn’t usually part of the story. Maine’s tragedy at the end of A Star Is Born, in fact, is presented as his sacrifice for someone else, a romantically destructive idea. In the real world, musicians who’ve faced addiction and mental-health problems—and there are likely more of them who live than who don’t—often talk about finding a way out through other people.

It’s hard for any culture to keep such survival stories in mind because those stories don’t have simple, dramatic endings. In Her Smell, the final show Becky plays with her bandmates as well as some guests—other women she abused and then reconciled with—is peppy and affirming. “That’s all I’ve got—it’s over,” she pants afterward, but whether she’s talking just about that concert or about her entire career is unclear. As a viewing experience, the last show is nowhere near as volcanic in intensity as the destruction scenes earlier in the movie, but that’s okay. A wallop of turmoil and a mellow recovery: If that’s a harder myth of stardom to sell, maybe that’s because it’s often not a myth at all.



What’s hard to comprehend, now, is how much of Dr. Larry Nassar’s sexual abuse of more than 300 preteen and teenage girls was conducted in plain sight. Erin Lee Carr’s new HBO documentary, At the Heart of Gold, includes excerpts from instructional videos Nassar posted online for other sports doctors to observe. In them, he runs his hands over girls’ bodies clothed in leotards; points out (and touches) one athlete’s gluteus muscle; massages one girl’s chest; pats yet another on the butt. Nassar went even further in private sessions with athletes, giving procedures he called “intravaginal adjustments” with ungloved hands and without prior warning. Often, when he did this, the girls’ parents were standing in the same room, watching while Nassar abused their daughters, listening as he talked nonstop the whole time.

Nassar, as At the Heart of Gold documents, was uniquely positioned to get away with what he did. He was a trusted, even beloved figure in his Michigan community, volunteering at his church and at local high schools, and offering free therapeutic sessions to girls who were cheerleaders, rowers, dancers. He had almost unchecked access to young athletes in his role as a sports doctor for USA Gymnastics and Michigan State University. And, crucially, he was operating within a sport in which girls are primed from the beginning to silently endure what happens to their body, one with a philosophy of “athletic Darwinism” where only the strongest and most stoic will go all the way. “It’s almost like being a wounded animal,” the former Olympic gymnast Kathy Johnson tells Carr. “You don’t show your weakness. You don’t show that you’re hurt.”

At the Heart of Gold arrives almost 18 months after Nassar was sentenced to between 40 and 175 years in prison. It has also landed in a moment when plenty of filmmakers are grappling with stories about alleged abusers whose status has insulated them from scrutiny for decades. While Nassar had neither the star power nor the money of R. Kelly or Michael Jackson, he did benefit from a culture that closed ranks around him and defended him long after he’d been exposed. The first time an athlete accused Nassar of abuse, Carr notes, was in 1997. It would be another 18 years—and hundreds of victims—before any of the accusations against him would stick.

USA Gymnastics, the Wall Street Journal reporter Rebecca Davis O’Brien says in the film, is a “money machine, and at the heart of it are teenage girls and their bodies. It seems like an arrangement that’s bound to create abuse.” The movie begins with archival footage of a gymnast mid-competition, leaping, falling, and then lying prone, sobbing in pain on the ground. A doctor is summoned to help take her away, but she shakes her head and unsteadily rises to her feet as the crowd vigorously applauds. “This is gutsy stuff,” the commentator says. That impossible grit, that mastery of pain, is what athlete after athlete tells Carr that the sport is all about. The sense of power, the former gymnast Jessica O’Beirne says, “the command over your body, doing stuff that regular people can’t do.”

The film runs through some of the practices in gymnastics that might seem egregious to outside observers—such as racking, where coaches put their weight on girls to force their bodies into splits. The athletes, in turn, are taught not to cry or yell out. The movie notes how the culture of gymnastics changed after the Romanian coach Béla Károlyi defected to the United States in the 1980s. It quickly became routine to train girls who were younger and younger, and to do so more intensively, with monthly camps at the Károlyis’ isolated ranch in Texas, where Nassar often was.

Compared with coaches such as Károlyi and John Geddert (whom one gymnast likens to Satan), Nassar wasn’t an obvious bad guy at first acquaintance. He often played good cop to the coaches’ bad ones, being kind to the gymnasts and helping them recover from the physical impact their bodies were taking. Geddert, the former gymnast Isabell Hutchins recalls, would “belittle you … break down every single girl until they thought they were nothing.” Nassar, in contrast, was “kind of like a friend I could go to.”

When some girls expressed alarm that Nassar was touching and manipulating their genitals, what they’d hear in response was that it was normal, nothing out of the ordinary. The gymnast Larissa Boyce recalls how, after reporting Nassar to her coach, Kathie Klages, in 1997, Klages responded by immediately warning her of the consequences of filing a report, both for Boyce and for Nassar. “So I convinced myself I must be the problem,” Boyce says. “And then I hopped back up on that table and he continued to abuse me for the next four years.”

More versions of this scenario played out. In 2014, Amanda Thomashow also reported Nassar for assault while she was a student at Michigan State University, only for the institution to find that no violation had been committed. “They gaslighted me,” she tells the camera, incandescent with rage. Carr contrasts footage of women talking about the emotional toll of reporting Nassar with tapes of Nassar being interviewed by the police, in which he’s folksy, cracking jokes with the cops, and seeming aghast that someone could have mistaken him for a predator.

What Carr manages to indict in the film is both a specific environment and a more general culture disinclined to believe what women say about their own body. The world of gymnastics, where girls were trained to suffer silently, to tough it out, and to never complain, let an abuser like Nassar operate with impunity for much of his career. But the ways in which the women who did confront him were silenced speaks to a larger phenomenon. They were warned that they’d ruin a man’s life, damage his career, hurt his family. They were told that they were misinterpreting things. They were encouraged even to silence one another.

The most powerful moments in the movie come in the final third, as Carr captures the week in January 2018 during which 156 women gave victim-impact statements before Nassar’s sentencing in criminal court. Kyle Stephens recalls how she was abused by Nassar, a former family friend, starting at 6 years old, and how her father ended his own life in 2016 shortly after realizing he’d believed Nassar’s word over his own daughter’s. The women speaking that week included some of American gymnastics’ biggest stars. “We,” the former Olympian Aly Raisman tells Nassar, “are now a force, and you are nothing.” To see such a vast group of women speaking out is shocking, but also encouraging—together, they represent something undeniably powerful. But you’re left wondering what it means that there had to be so many of them for Nassar to finally get justice.



Women—especially mothers—make cruel choices in Nicole Dennis-Benn’s novels. Take Margot, the protagonist in the Jamaican-born writer’s much-praised 2016 debut, Here Comes the Sun. Margot has sex with the customers at the hotel where she works, earning extra money to put her 15-year-old sister, Thandi, through school. She’s a second mother to Thandi, and she’s trying to save the girl from the sexual depredations that Margot herself experienced while growing up in Jamaica. Day-to-day, Margot doesn’t think the sex work is demeaning. “She sees it as merely satisfying the curiosity of foreigners,” Dennis-Benn writes, “foreigners who pay her good money to be their personal tour guide on the island of her body.” That doesn’t mean she forgives their mother, who sold Margot’s virginity to a stranger at the market years ago. Yet she also goes on to repeat the pattern: In pursuit of her own ambition—to become the manager of a new hotel—Margot starts a prostitution ring composed of young girls from the island.

And consider Delores, Margot and Thandi’s mother, so embittered after years of smiling and selling trinkets to vacationers that she can’t bear the prospect of her own children escaping her fate. Marketing her eldest isn’t enough. In a heartbreaking scene, she lashes out at Thandi and says, “Who yuh know really love a black girl for more than what’s between her legs?” For Thandi, who is already crushed under the weight of her family’s expectation that she drag them all out of poverty, Delores’s verdict couldn’t be bleaker. It promises to be a self-fulfilling prophecy: “Membah dis, nobody love a black girl. Not even harself.”

Dennis-Benn’s second novel, Patsy, sets out to challenge Delores’s warning, and in forcefully simple prose reveals just how vexed that quest is. Once again, a mother-daughter dynamic drives the story, but this time a different kind of ruthlessness lies at its heart. Patsy, 28 when the novel opens, decides she won’t remain in Jamaica and let her resentments fester. She plans to start life over in America, spurred by the promise of reuniting with her childhood friend and secret lover, Cicely, who has settled in New York. But Patsy’s escape has a cost: She abandons her 5-year-old daughter, Tru.

What kind of mother leaves her child for a lover? Or puts a $600 price tag on her daughter’s virginity? Dennis-Benn, in her novels, is unsparing in her scrutiny of love and the sacrifices—not the gauzy and selfless kind—that it can demand. Her characters are often shortsighted and spiteful. They sometimes hurt those closest to them to protect themselves and pursue their own desires and goals. But what looks like cruelty in Dennis-Benn’s protagonists is also a desperate expression of autonomy, an insistence on claiming a sense of agency in the face of dispiriting alternatives. On the surface, Patsy’s choice to chase her lover to New York is a selfish one. At the same time, it is her rebellion against a vision of yet more lovelessness and inhumanity. “What’s di point of raising up a child in a world I couldn’t change?” Patsy asks herself.  

“Maybe home is somewhere I’m going, and have never been before,” reads the novel’s epigraph, a quotation from the poet Warsan Shire that aptly blends hope and rootlessness. Dennis-Benn shuttles readers back and forth between Brooklyn, where Patsy’s longed-for reunion with Cicely proves elusive, and Jamaica, where Tru struggles with her own identity and sense of abandonment. Cicely isn’t about to risk the life she’s built in a lovely Crown Heights brownstone, having married an abusive but well-to-do man and become a mother. Meanwhile, depression and the hardness of New York City threaten to overcome Patsy. And the negative space that mother and daughter occupy in each other’s lives looms large.

Delores’s grim edict, it seems, is all too prophetic. The country that Patsy has fled to isn’t so different from the one she left behind, and Dennis-Benn makes sure her protagonist confronts that reality. Obstacles to love, especially for lesbian women, are everywhere. So are struggle and a sense of displacement. The Jamaican hotel workers in Here Comes the Sun go “home to their shabby neighborhoods, away from the fantasy they help create about a country where they are as important as washed-up seaweed.” Patsy’s experience in America is an ironic variation on this theme: She left a country whose citizens are mostly service workers and flew thousands of miles to a rapidly gentrifying Brooklyn to end up tending to the same wealthy white people who might vacation on her homeland’s shores. Patsy heartbreakingly details what it takes to survive in America as an undocumented immigrant. After Cicely’s husband kicks Patsy out, she lives in squalor, sharing a twin bed with a co-worker, Fionna, a Trinidadian immigrant, and working at a tacky Jamaican restaurant. She’s a bathroom attendant, plunging sanitary napkins out of toilets, before becoming a nanny for a series of rich Manhattanites.

Yet for all the bleak determinism and brutality in Dennis-Benn’s fictional worlds, what stands out in Patsy is yearning—for opportunity, for pleasure, for connection, almost exclusively among women. That yearning, coexisting as it does within the cold-eyed realism of its setting, helps Dennis-Benn’s second novel strike a solemn balance between entrapment and escape. “We can’t afford to love in dis country. We not at dat place yet as immigrants where we can choose love,” Fionna says to Patsy as they’re rolling hand towels at work. “Like everyt’ing else, we tek what we can get—grab on to any lifeboat so we don’t drown in dis place called America. Love? Love won’t get we papers.” Patsy knows that, but her expectation of intimacy on her own terms, despite the obstacles, is what turns the novel’s otherwise familiar immigrant narrative into one that includes, at times, a surprising idealism about the complicated matrix of sex and love.

Though worlds apart, Patsy and her daughter face struggles that similarly juxtapose harsh social context and travails of the heart. Yet neither of Dennis-Benn’s characters ultimately views herself as a victim. Back in Jamaica, Tru doesn’t neatly conform to the kinds of femininity she sees around her and finds herself stranded among her peers. And in New York, Patsy is forced to reflect on the sense of limitation that drove her away from home. “She was never given the choice to say no the first time her legs were pried open,” Dennis-Benn writes of Patsy early in the novel. “Never given a choice to look at another woman and allow herself to be carried by the feeling,” without fearing a violent attack. Patsy didn’t choose to become a mother—abortion is illegal in Jamaica, so her desire for motherhood was never a part of the equation. Yet Tru is not simply an unwanted burden. As Patsy gears up to go to New York, telling her daughter of her plans becomes an occasion for a hard reckoning with the costs of going after love—a chance to feel the power of making choices from a place of passion, not fear.

Patsy wants to see this escape as a form of freedom for Tru as well. It means not saddling her daughter with the weight of her own dreams or the anxiety of unrealized ambitions. “The absence of a mother is more dignified than the presence of a distant one,” Patsy rationalizes when thinking about the decade that she let go by before reaching out. But after a much-delayed attempt at contacting her daughter ends catastrophically for Tru, Patsy has to answer for keeping her distance. The beginning of their hesitant reconciliation holds unexpected promise: Tru seems en route to becoming the change in their community that her mother sought, ultimately with no input from Patsy at all. And Patsy finally finds a foothold in a place where she can fully love whom she wants.

In the end, Dennis-Benn gives her characters the dose of happiness and self-assurance that many stories about social ills refuse women like them. She does that without facilely wishing away the big issues—racism, homophobia, gender, classism—that her novel tackles. Patsy is a portrait of black queer women grasping for self-determination, and a challenge to the conventions of what is expected of good mothers and good women and good immigrants. Tru’s inheritance from Patsy isn’t years of doting or gifts from America, but instead the permission to thrive in a society that will always threaten to crush her will and desire. In writing beautifully about that unending struggle, Dennis-Benn finds a way to extend to black girls and women some of the love that the world may never offer.



Upon opening the Criterion Channel app, the user is greeted by a sight typical of any streaming service: an array of titles  and collections featuring a smorgasbord of movies for subscribers to choose from. But most streaming services—Netflix, Amazon Prime, and the like—look different for everyone, because they’re algorithmically designed to try to predict what your next selection might be. Not so with the Criterion Channel, which has emerged from the ashes of FilmStruck, a popular if niche classic-movie archive that was dismantled by its corporate ownership last November. This is an experience more akin to going to your local repertory theater, something outside the deafening churn of the mainstream.

“There’s a huge emphasis on focusing our attention on certain things at certain times, like Game of Thrones or whatever it is at the moment,” Peter Becker, the president of the Criterion Collection, told me in an interview at his company’s office. “A lot of energy and marketing is spent on those things, and a lot of our behavior is shaped by those things. Combined with algorithms, they speak for a lot of people’s time. So in order to really create an adventurous movie experience, you have to pull yourself out of the gravitational field of that. And that’s what this space is meant to be.”

As industry behemoths like Disney and Apple roll out plans for their own streaming services that will be defined by big budgets, star power, and brand awareness, Criterion is selling itself to passionate film fans willing to shell out a $10.99 monthly fee for access to a more obscure archive. Part of that pitch is Criterion’s ability to exist as a space that isn’t governed by traffic concerns or a huge corporation’s bottom line. “We’re not going to be looking at what we think is a success based on the number of people who clicked on it,” Becker said. “I think we’re going to try and show things because we think they’re important to be shown.”

The Criterion Collection first emerged as a home-video company selling LaserDiscs of classic films in the mid-1980s before moving to DVDs in the late ’90s. Its carefully assembled releases of forgotten masterpieces and canonical works are still coveted pieces of physical media in a digital age. But Criterion’s online library is similarly formidable. At one point, it was exclusively hosted by Hulu; then it merged with the archives of Turner Classic Movies for the streaming service FilmStruck, which launched in 2016. Though FilmStruck attracted praise and a devoted subscriber base, it was always viewed as a specialized offering by TCM’s corporate owners, WarnerMedia.

AT&T, which recently acquired Warner in a much scrutinized merger, has stressed the need for expansion and Netflix-size scaling in its conversations with the employees of prestige properties like HBO. FilmStruck was a casualty of that new mind-set, eliminated because it was too small. “We are committed to launching a compelling and competitive product that will serve as a complement to our existing businesses and help us to expand our reach,” WarnerMedia CEO John Stankey said last October of his plans for one giant catchall service that could bundle in the classic-film library. He never directly commented on the end of FilmStruck, focusing only on his plans for a larger property.

“From our perspective, FilmStruck was doing great,” Becker said of the Criterion team. “Audience was growing, programming was getting better and better. My feeling about it was that it didn’t matter [to AT&T] how successful we ever got.” Launched this month, the Criterion Channel is the company’s first attempt at a streaming service without a bigger partner like Hulu or TCM, which means it can diversify some of its offerings instead of only highlighting classic films. The Criterion library functions as the “spine” of the database, according to Becker, but there are also more contemporary art and foreign films, interviews and documentaries about filmmaking, and special imports, such as the series of noir films from Columbia Pictures that helped kick off the channel’s launch.

“We wanted to make it clear that we were making a commitment to continuing to show classic Hollywood cinema the way that FilmStruck did,” says Penelope Bartlett, a programmer for the channel. “But we try to make the series [that we feature] not overwhelming—we want you to get that sense of achievement that you can actually watch all of them. And we also feel like generally in the digital-streaming environment, people are completely overwhelmed by choices.” Hence the careful efforts to curate. The current noir series unites 11 criminally underrated Columbia features, mostly from the ’40s and ’50s, including Fritz Lang’s The Big Heat, Blake Edwards’s Experiment in Terror, and Don Siegel’s The Lineup.

Becker said that while he’s proud of the Criterion library, he knew that the service needed to offer more to succeed. “It had to be something where the whole film community was going to actually come together and contribute.” As the service expands, it will bring in new repertory series, curated suggestions for movies to watch as double or triple features, and even original documentaries about filmmakers and film technique. It’s all intended to spur communal viewing experiences for users around the country, a virtual art-house theater of sorts. “We’re really trying to think about this in terms of people making something for people. There is literally nothing automatic about this site. When the carousel changes, a human being changed it that morning,” Becker said.

“How do we keep this audience connected?” he continued. “With the idea that somebody is presenting and proposing these films to you in some coherent way.” Coherence is a feature that none of the massive streaming companies can claim, even as they add more and more original titles to their archives. It may be the thing that helps set Criterion apart.



Adam Sandler left Saturday Night Live in 1995 after a five-season run, having served as a core part of the show’s early ’90s cast, alongside big names such as David Spade, Chris Farley, Chris Rock, Rob Schneider, and Mike Myers. All of them went on to great success in movies and television, but their tenure at the show, which leaned on recurring characters and a loud, obnoxious strain of humor, was critically rocky. The show was eventually dubbed “Saturday Night Dead” in a notorious New York magazine article, and Sandler (along with most of the cast) was fired in a dramatic overhaul that helped save SNL from cancellation.

That history might explain why it took 24 years for Sandler to finally return to SNL to host the show, an honor that’s pretty typical for any departed cast member who goes on to stardom. Sandler has made two brief, uncredited appearances since 1995, and showed up for the big 40th-anniversary special, but in the time between his departure and last night’s hosting spot, he was essentially absent. He acknowledged that awkwardness early on in his monologue: He sang a song about how the executive producer Lorne Michaels fired him, inviting Rock onstage to share the same story and quipping, “Then I made over $4 billion at the box office, so I guess you could say I won,” in the strangely gruff, deadpan, yet somehow infantile voice that made him a comedy star.

Like other recent returning alums—including Seth Meyers and John Mulaney—Sandler was a refreshing jolt for a show that has otherwise felt a little lifeless. Saturday Night Live has not had the strongest season; these past few years have not been nearly as catastrophic as the 1993–95 run that saw NBC actually contemplate ending the show, but they’ve carried the familiar whiff of creative stagnation that often comes at the end of any era for the show, good or bad. Kate McKinnon, the one indisputable star currently aboard, is nearing the end of her contract; Kenan Thompson, arguably the greatest veteran in SNL history, could finally be ready to move on; and the head writers Colin Jost and Michael Che have been hosting “Weekend Update” together for five years now, to mostly poor critical notices. The show’s political material, which should be thriving in such a news-heavy era, is mostly forgettable and heavily reliant on surprise guest stars.

Sandler’s material this week was mostly warmhearted and pleasant, very reliant on nostalgia, and unsurprisingly geared toward longtime fans. It made for a diverting episode, one heavy on the chuckles and light on big laughs, and also largely lacking in hot-button material. Opera Man, Sandler’s strongest recurring character from his original run on the show, returned to sing through the news on “Weekend Update,” getting in stronger jabs at Joe Biden and the presidential election than Jost or Che could muster. A “Sandler family reunion” sketch gave most of the ensemble their chance to do an impression of their favorite Sandler character (or verbal tic).

Nicest of all was the final sketch of the night, a sung tribute to Sandler’s good friend Chris Farley, who died in 1997, two years after leaving SNL. The comedian debuted the song in his recent Netflix comedy special, Adam Sandler: 100% Fresh, which earned him some of his best reviews in years because of the unusual amount of introspection he mixed in with his usual blend of silly voices and juvenile musings. As he noted in his monologue last night, Sandler was just 23 when he started on SNL. At 52 now, with dozens of mediocre, big-budget comedies under his belt, he’s finally developing an elegiac side, and it’s provided some helpful depth to his long-standing persona, highlighting the genuine sweetness underpinning even his most immature material.

Saturday Night Live is not quite as old as Sandler himself, but it’s close—it’s about to wrap up its 44th season, and Lorne Michaels is probably getting ready to search for a new generation of cast members. So the show can be forgiven for taking on a similarly retrospective mood when an old favorite drops by. Still, such visits give it the vibe of a dusty old museum, the feel of a series defined by its history rather than its ability to capture the cultural mood of the moment. Decades of reinvention suggest that SNL will once again become the thriving topical powerhouse it’s been so many times before, but as Sandler recalled, that transformation often comes hand in hand with a big shake-up. Perhaps the next one is on the horizon.



This article contains spoilers for Native Son.

Just over a year after the author Richard Wright published his first novel, Native Son, in March 1940, the text was adapted for the first time. In March 1941, Wright and the playwright Paul Green staged a contentious, Orson Welles–directed production at New York’s St. James Theatre. Ten years later, Wright played his own protagonist in an unfortunate Argentinian film adaptation, Sangre negra (“black blood”). By 2014, there had been yet another Native Son film and two more plays.

It might seem, then, that Wright’s novel is the kind of story that lends itself easily—or at least fruitfully—to visual renderings. But as source material, it’s grisly and heavy-handed, a tale that originally was met with either horror or adulation. Native Son follows Bigger Thomas, a poor black man living in Chicago during the Great Depression. Bigger is hired as a chauffeur by Mr. Dalton, a wealthy white man whose daughter, Mary, soon takes an interest in the young black man. In the novel’s climactic event, Bigger accidentally suffocates Mary one night after helping the drunken girl to her room and fearing her blind mother would sense his presence if she heard Mary’s lustful banter. Realizing he’s killed her, Bigger frantically carries Mary’s body to the Dalton family’s furnace, then decapitates her corpse so it will fit inside. The point, Wright insists throughout the text, is that Bigger was conditioned to become a criminal by a country that viewed all black men as savages. His violence was an inevitability.
A new HBO adaptation from the director Rashid Johnson and the playwright Suzan-Lori Parks now joins its predecessors. The film thankfully dispenses with some of the novel’s most graphic elements and moves its protagonist out of the 1930s and into contemporary Chicago. This Bigger, who more often goes by Big, is played by a graceful and dynamic Ashton Sanders (Moonlight). He skulks about the screen, and the South Side, in green hair and punkish attire: black high-water pants, black nail polish, a black leather jacket with OR AM I FREAKING OUT spray-painted across the back. Big’s got a lot of style.

The same could be said for the film itself. The HBO production’s strongest points are the diversions from Wright’s original text, many of them indications that Johnson and Parks took to their source material with an eye toward James Baldwin’s salient critiques of Wright. Even moving the central violent act to the back half of the film creates a welcome spaciousness in the narrative. But, too often, Johnson’s stylistic choices make for a jazzy and unnerving film that prioritizes legibly black aesthetics over the development of black characters. Johnson, a prominent conceptual artist, imbues the film with an artfulness that feels intentional, but nonetheless unfocused. The pairing of his indulgent aestheticism with Parks’s overly poetic writing gives Native Son the feel of a graduate-school project: at times quite visually stunning, but with tonal incongruities that make for a disjointed viewing experience.

In one early scene, for example, Big bikes over to a parking lot to pick up weed from his friend Gus (Jerod Haynes). The first shot inside Gus’s car prominently features only two items: a green vape pen in Gus’s hand and an Africa-shaped pendant dangling from his rear-view mirror. It’s all very on the nose. You can practically see subtitles: A drug exchange is about to happen between two black men, but don’t worry, they’re also deep brothers.

At best, these kinds of choices are distracting. The conversation that follows between the two men is a revelatory one. Gus tells Big the two should work together, and Big demurs. He notes that he—like many other young black men—doesn’t have many job prospects, but he does want to resist the drug trade. The scene’s also got a touch of friendly humor; Gus asks Big whether he wants anything other than weed, laughing as he says, “Shit, I got E … F, G, H, I, the alphabet in this motherfucker.”

Moments such as this one might have served to sketch out a vision of who Big is beyond what the world expects him to be. But Native Son breezes past opportunities to deepen Big’s character far enough beyond Wright’s original writing to justify a 2019 adaptation. The film gestures at Big’s internal motivations, but doesn’t bear them out. Instead, we see him visibly uncomfortable in a soul-food joint with Mary (Margaret Qualley) and her white Communist boyfriend, Jan (Nick Robinson). We get classical-music interludes and shots of books, including Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man, in Big’s room. (In the shot that features the Ellison book, Big places a gun on it.) We see him admire the Daltons’ library, and the camera lingers for a moment on the volumes—among them, John Updike’s Rabbit Redux, Robert Lowell’s Life Studies, and, naturally, Richard Wright’s Native Son. These signifiers function primarily as shortcuts for suggesting that Bigger is a different sort of black man without offering any context for why the norm itself exists.
But, like Wright’s book itself, relying on visual cues associated with whiteness to point to a troubled black character’s ostensibly complex interiority is a lazy rehashing of racial stereotypes. It’s true that racist tropes about young black men characterize them as innately criminal, and that they are over-surveilled and underemployed because of pernicious and systematic racial discrimination. But Johnson and Parks’s film doesn’t bridge the gap between these conditions and the putative inevitability of Big’s crimes. Hagiographic shots alone—such as the one in which Big faces the camera in front of Chicago’s glassy Cloud Gate public sculpture, while a time-lapsed stream of people flows around him—don’t shed light on his needs or motivations.

Nowhere is the dissonance between Johnson’s experimental stylistic choices and the grave subject matter more notable than in the film’s final moments, when Big dies at the hands of the police. After killing Mary, Big hides from law enforcement with his girlfriend, Bessie (KiKi Layne), in a warehouse-like structure. The two fight, and she runs away when he becomes physical with her. (It was, frankly, a relief that the film cut the novel’s rape scene, but Bessie gets more hairstyles than she does interiority.) After Bessie flees, the camera follows Big as he returns to the empty top floor of the building while jarringly hymnlike music plays. The cops close in on him as near-blinding light shines in through the windows. The music picks up, and Big dies in a symphony of jazz.
The scene is neither heartbreaking nor particularly revelatory, but painful to watch nonetheless. In this, Native Son’s ending reveals the film’s biggest disappointment: Together, Parks and Johnson might be able to make a thrilling, gorgeous movie. Native Son isn’t it.



It is a truth universally acknowledged, at least in cinematic comedies of the past decade or so, that just about every woman on-screen must be in want of Seth Rogen. From Knocked Up to Zack and Miri Make a Porno to Neighbors, Hollywood has continually presented the star as a romantic lead while marveling at the supposed ludicrousness of the concept, to the extent that his new vehicle is a rom-com called Long Shot. The premise? That Rogen, playing to type as an avuncular, bearded fellow who’s no stranger to sweatpants, gets entangled in a relationship with an impressive and a spectacularly beautiful politician played by Charlize Theron.

The director, Jonathan Levine, has built an entire film around the idea that the mere possibility of Theron falling for Rogen is so extreme as to be worth dramatizing. But after all these years, isn’t it time to admit that Rogen is one of the only consistently compelling love interests in cinema right now, be it by default or not? With square-jawed beefcakes like the Chrises Evans, Pratt, and Hemsworth tied up in saving the world, Rogen may not be such a long shot for audiences after all. Underneath the hyperbolic, odd-couple marketing and titling of this film beats the heart of a pretty standard, extremely watchable love story with a dash of political comedy—think The American President for the age of Twitter and edibles.

The plot follows Fred Flarsky (played by Rogen), a left-leaning investigative journalist who loses his job when his agitprop publication is absorbed into a larger media conglomerate. Flarsky, as a boy, had a crush on his babysitter, a headstrong girl named Charlotte Field (Theron) who lived next door. Now she’s secretary of state to a buffoon of a president (Bob Odenkirk), preparing to spin up her own campaign to succeed him, and impressive and famous enough to be embroiled in a flirtation with the handsome prime minister of Canada (Alexander Skarsgård). After a chance encounter with Flarsky at a party, Field brings him on board her campaign as a speechwriter, and their friendship develops into a full-blown clandestine affair as they tour the world testing her policy positions.

If anything, the biggest problem with Long Shot is that it’s a little too basic, struggling to match its weak plotting to Theron and Rogen’s excellent chemistry. The movie’s 125-minute run time is unconscionable considering that the story could easily be resolved in 90: Low-status boy meets high-status girl; they hit it off nonetheless, and then have to navigate a few expected difficulties. Still, given the paucity of onscreen romance in theaters these days (Netflix has made more of an effort on this front than any other major studio), Long Shot is almost automatically easy to enjoy. Its two stars are consummate pros doing what they do best: Rogen projecting everyman awkwardness, and Theron wearing her self-consciousness on her sleeve while still looking fabulous (think of her great recent work in Tully, but with a little more glamour). While Rogen’s own comic persona, all growly voiced and bumbling, is well established by now, he’s also an underrated comic partner who has helped spur career-funniest performances from many an actor.

As Field, Theron finds the right balance of superstardom and vulnerability, playing off the way many powerful women in politics are unfairly judged as distant, unfunny, or intimidating. Flarsky is brought aboard to give Field’s campaign a chummier vibe, and Rogen himself unlocks Theron’s skill for boisterous, fratty humor. There’s a set piece about Field trying the drug Molly for the first time, and another about the surprising speed with which she reaches orgasm. Those more manic elements all feel a little tired, though; Hollywood comedies have already made the point, time and time again, that girls can be just as gross as boys. Instead, Long Shot thrives on Theron and Rogen’s verbal repartee and the more mundane issues in their relationship, where her need to compromise as a political candidate clashes with his vague idealism about shaking up the system.

The screenplay (by Dan Sterling and Liz Hannah) might have benefited from digging into some of the ideological differences between Flarsky and Field, but it usually opts to go silly and broad, bringing in friends played by O’Shea Jackson Jr. and June Diane Raphael for fizzy one-liners that gloss over deeper conflicts. Flarsky’s topical interests, and most of the film’s insights into geopolitics, are intentionally hazy. He has the dressed-down look and attitude of a “dirtbag lefty,” but his thoughts don’t extend much beyond a general distaste for big business and The Man. In the end, Long Shot is too fixated on the supposed absurdity of its romantic pair to spend much time considering them as people. Which is a shame, because the human moments are the only parts where the film really shines.



The loss of innocence is a theme that writers can take entire novels to document. Ava DuVernay manages the same feat in fewer than eight minutes. That’s all the time it takes in When They See Us for five kids to tussle with parents over Yankees loyalty, cajole girlfriends into accompanying them to Kennedy Fried Chicken, and tell sisters about their audacious plans to make first trumpet in the school band. One minute, Kevin Richardson (played by Asante Blackk) is gently placing a blanket over his mother who’s asleep on the couch, the room around him glowing a warm, protective orange. The next, he’s in the stark blue cold of Central Park, a tiny figure in a red padded coat, running away from a cop who drags Kevin to the ground and knocks him unconscious with a vicious blow to the head.

When They See Us, whose four episodes arrive on Netflix this Friday, was originally titled The Central Park Five, a nomenclature that stuck to the five Harlem teenagers arrested in 1989 for the rape and attempted murder of a 28-year-old female jogger. Catchy and dehumanizing, the phrase enabled the boys to become scapegoats not just for a single crime, but also for a whole city’s feverish paranoia. These are the kinds of societal fault lines and historic outrages that true-crime miniseries typically love to probe. When They See Us is different. DuVernay, who directed and co-wrote all four episodes, isn’t particularly interested in reinvestigating this case, or even in delving into the circumstances that led up to it. Her motivation, rather, is to delineate five individuals whose identities were erased and rewritten before they’d even had the chance to finish eighth grade. This is a work that wants viewers to see these people, and the fullness of their humanity, above everything else.

What this means is a miniseries that’s both profoundly rich and extraordinarily hard to watch. There’s barely time to process the characters before they’re plunged headfirst into a nightmare, a setup that lets viewers experience some of their spiraling confusion. One April night in Harlem, five boys see a group of their peers, noisy and exuberant, heading into Central Park. They follow them in: Antron McCray (Caleel Harris), the “loyal to the soil” Yankees fan; Raymond Santana (Marquis Rodriguez), the peacock of the group; Korey Wise (Jharrel Jerome), who leaves his outraged girlfriend in a fast-food joint to join his friend Yusef Salaam (Ethan Herisse); and Kevin. Everything happens in a blink. The group jeers at some passing cyclists, who are irritated by the fact that they’re blocking the path. Kevin watches, alarmed, when he sees a guy being beaten up. Then there are sirens and the sounds of police scanners and teenagers scattering into the wind, except for the few who happen to be arbitrarily scooped up on the same night a female jogger is raped, brutally beaten, and left for dead.

It’s hard, given the plain circumstances the series lays out, to comprehend the mental gymnastics employed by the sex-crimes prosecutor Linda Fairstein (played here by Felicity Huffman) to reason that five boys being questioned by the police as potential witnesses might be suspects instead. It’s simpler to see how coded language and institutional racism might have helped Fairstein persuade pliant NYPD officers to coerce confessions: Where a colleague (played by Famke Janssen) sees “a dozen kids harassing cyclists in the park,” Fairstein sees “animals” and “little thugs.” Even when the boys break, after being questioned for 30 hours without food or sleep, and without any kind of legal representation, their confessions are contradictory, nonsensical, and heartbreakingly naive. Kevin is so young at 14 that he visibly panics when the cop interviewing him starts describing sexual acts. Korey stutters earnestly through his own statement, saying, “This is my first … extreme I did to any kind of female.”

The tremendous dexterity of the five actors cast as the teenagers, and the emotional texture written into the story, makes the first episode heartrending. It doesn’t get easier. The second captures the trial; the third, which brings in four older actors to play the characters as adults (Jerome does double duty as Korey), tracks the experiences of Kevin, Antron, Yusef, and Raymond in juvenile detention, and their difficulties adjusting to release. But the fourth, which runs nearly 90 minutes long and portrays 16-year-old Korey’s path into an adult prison and the strange events that led to the entire group’s exoneration, is so enraging and brutal to watch that it almost threatens to lose viewers entirely. What makes it vital, though, is Jerome’s performance as a kid growing up in front of our eyes, under the most outrageous circumstances. The 21-year-old actor, best known for playing the teenage Kevin in Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight, manages to make Korey seem permanently on the verge of breaking, while also conveying the trust he gives out so easily—a trait that only makes him more vulnerable to the abuses of others.

DuVernay also incorporates moments of striking beauty and sentiment into her story that put bleak scenes into sharper contrast. Antron’s mother, Linda (Marsha Stephanie Blake), gets a wrenching monologue where she tells her son that no matter how much the world hates him, she loves him enough to counter it. Kevin’s sister, Angela (Kylie Bunbury), finds a rare moment of hope in a Thrifty rental-car center. The cinematographer Bradford Young (Selma, Arrival, Solo) uses light in uncommon ways, filming Huffman’s Fairstein with a bright halo behind her in one scene that casts her face into murky squalor. The final episode, which tracks Korey’s 12 years of incarceration, swings between confinement and moments of release, literal and imaginative. And throughout, DuVernay recreates 1980s and 2000s New York with a powerful eye (and ear) for totems of time and place.When They See Us is studded with guest actors of note—Niecy Nash, Michael K. Williams, and John Leguizamo as parents of the accused; Joshua Jackson, Blair Underwood, and Christopher Jackson as defense lawyers; Vera Farmiga as a district attorney; Dascha Polanco as a flatly awful stepmother. The appearance that seems the most inevitable is Donald Trump, whose cable-news grandstanding during the trial involved arguing for the death penalty for the teenagers, while maximizing his own exposure. The archival moment feels necessary, while being mercifully restrained. This story isn’t about him. The events DuVernay races through, the scenes she writes that are obviously invented for dramatic effect or to underscore a point—they all serve the greater purpose of taking the words Central Park Five and razing what they’ve come to mean. In their stead, she’s letting five men whose narratives were stolen be seen in their complexity.



This review avoids serious spoilers about Avengers: Endgame, but mild plot descriptions do follow.

The biggest surprise of Avengers: Endgame may be its leisurely pace. All right, perhaps that’s not the film’s most shocking twist. Considering that the movie is the 22nd entry in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, and that it purports to bid farewell to at least some of its major characters, Avengers: Endgame has a few bombshells. Given that the running time is a whopping 182 minutes, audiences might go in expecting something that feels like a slog. But the film earns its length not by overstuffing the frame with opulent action, but by slowing things down and basking in the charisma of its ensemble.

In the 11 years since Marvel began its experiment of creating an interconnected world of superhero movies with Iron Man, the studio has assembled an all-star cast of hunks, cult favorites, and Hollywood legends to play its leads, costumed and otherwise. Avengers: Endgame, directed by Anthony and Joe Russo, lives up to its promise of providing a real ending for the series’ original crew, including Iron Man, Thor, Captain America, and the Hulk. But the movie also functions as a brag for how expansive the Marvel universe has gotten over the past decade—a necessary strength, since the broader franchise shows no sign of concluding, just recycling and evolving as the box-office receipts continue to pile up.

After all, the Marvel movies can never really stop. This was a notion that Thanos (played by Josh Brolin), the big bad of the Avengers series, sought to challenge when he showed up in Infinity War, which was released almost exactly one year ago. Thanos, a giant purple meanie from a distant planet that was destroyed by overpopulation, entered this cinematic universe and declared it crowded. After assembling the mighty Infinity Stones, a collection of celestially significant jewels, he set about trying to thin the herd, killing off a few major characters and eventually snapping his fingers and turning half of all living things into ash.

Endgame is set in the aftermath of that devastating Snapture, with the galaxy’s remaining heroes struggling to pick up the pieces. Popular pals such as Black Panther, Spider-Man, Dr. Strange, and the Scarlet Witch have vanished, and the Russos (along with the screenwriters Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely) emphasize just how miserable life has become in their absence. Whereas Infinity War was all chaos, a frantic race to stop Thanos from executing his plan, Endgame is curiously static for much of its running time, thriving more on witty dialogue and the well-established dynamics of its cast than on CGI bedlam.

Of course, the story eventually shifts into epic mode, and the action has the usual bland competence of Marvel movies (something even outstanding entries such as Black Panther struggled to dodge). But all the applause breaks and jaw-dropping developments work only because of the interpersonal bonds that have been strengthened over the years and that Endgame spends much of its time celebrating. After beginning with a mournful tone, the film turns goofier and livelier as the team’s wild gambit to save the world comes into focus; it’s to the Russos’ credit that they manage this transition with aplomb.

Digging into the details of Endgame’s plot is a very tricky proposition. If you’re invested in the Marvel world, it’s best to go in knowing next to nothing at all. One should head to the theater armed just with the memory of what happened in Infinity War, as well as perhaps the briefest of refreshers on the details of the Infinity Stones. It’s not giving anything away to say that the film mostly focuses on the original team that headlined the first Avengers movie, all of whom conveniently survived Thanos’s magic snap. Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr.), Thor (Chris Hemsworth), Captain America (Chris Evans), Black Widow (Scarlett Johansson), the Hulk (Mark Ruffalo), and, returning from a mysterious sojourn, Hawkeye (Jeremy Renner) all gather to try to undo Thanos’s universe-wide genocide.

Their mission takes them on a winding course that touches down in the furthest reaches of the Marvel realm, referencing the best-loved entries from the series as well as more overlooked chapters. If Avengers: Endgame were, for some bizarre reason, your first Marvel movie, it’d be a miserable experience. But for devoted fans, it functions as a greatest-hits clip-show package. It’s filled with hat-tips and winks to the audience—forgivable pieces of indulgence, given the goodwill the series has built up with millions of viewers. The film works to resolve conflicts beyond Thanos, fights that were first kindled in movies such as Captain America: Civil War (which wrenched Captain America and Iron Man apart) or Thor: Ragnarok (which rent the magic kingdom of Asgard asunder). For viewers, much of the joy will come from watching the movie pull it all off, effortlessly tying most of the series’ narrative threads into a satisfying knot.

The biggest question the film leaves open is whether the Avengers—as a name brand in the Marvel Universe—should continue after this barnstorming ending. The Marvel experiment continues apace, with many (mostly untitled) new editions on the docket, and Endgame will make more than enough money to justify them. But it’s hard to know whether the series will ever be able to replicate the peculiar magic of this movie’s finale, which had me realizing with a jolt, over and over again, how much I cared about the lives of these loud, wisecracking, CGI-bedazzled champions. The newer arrivals to the franchise, folks such as Black Panther (Chadwick Boseman) and Captain Marvel (Brie Larson), are similarly lovable, but who knows whether the formula of “heroes assembling again and again until their contract options run out” can be repeated forever. All I know is that Thanos’s demand for a dramatic ending in Infinity War pays off here in all the right ways. The Avengers, as a concept, probably won’t be going anywhere, but Endgame still feels like a proper goodbye.



On Family Food Fight, a new show hosted and executive-produced by the restaurateur Ayesha Curry, cooking is competitive, but it’s not a ruthless game. The ABC series pits four families against one another each week, with one group being eliminated and the others claiming their spot at the show’s official competition tables. The remaining families will compete for a $100,000 prize. Along the way, they prepare long-held recipes, bicker about culinary responsibilities, and banter with the show’s judges.

The series, which premiered Thursday, draws on a formula that will undoubtedly feel familiar to anyone who watches game shows or cooking series. If the show were a dish, it’d be a largely pleasant fusion of Chopped, The Great British Baking Show, and Family Feud. Though moments of inter- and intra-family tension emerge, there are no cutthroat scenes, no Gordon Ramsay–esque yells, no uncontrollable meltdowns. It’s fun to watch with audiences of all ages; it’s mercifully nice.

Each episode, Curry evaluates the contestants’ dishes alongside her fellow judges, the restaurateurs Graham Elliott and Cat Cora (the first woman to hold the Iron Chef title). Elliott has served as a judge on MasterChef Junior, the popular kid-focused spin-off of Ramsay’s apoplectic MasterChef. And though there are no young children on Family Food Fight, the show finds Elliott channeling the same gentle energy. The judges lavish praise on families for their successes, such as a banana pudding that inspired Elliott to “believe in a higher power.” It’s comfort television.

As on MasterChef Junior, none of the judges, even in their critiques, condescends to their participants. Errors that would earn scorn or outrage on Chopped—undercooked fried chicken, for example—are met with light admonition and suggestions for how to correct the mistake moving forward (in this case, giving on-the-bone poultry more time in the oven post-frying). For viewers who may not know what tempering an egg means, this can be a welcome tonal choice. Family Food Fight also features miniature cooking lessons from Curry and the other judges, which serve as entertaining instruction for producing classic dishes such as eggs Benedict.

Much of the show’s genteel, celebratory sensibility comes from the presence of Curry herself. As the author of a New York Times best-selling cookbook and the wife of the Golden State Warriors phenom Steph Curry, Ayesha Curry has spent several years carefully curating a (nearly) unobjectionable public image. In her post as executive producer, host, and co-judge of Family Food Fight, she is supportive even as she challenges participants to think critically while cooking. She reminds them that “one of our biggest criteria … is working together as a family.”

Indeed, the most satisfying moments of Family Food Fight emerge when contestants collaborate to produce recipes that clearly hold a lot of personal significance. During the premiere, for example, the Graves brothers prepared a meal in honor of their late mother, including a chocolate bundt cake they made using her recipe. When they competed in the “breakfast for dinner”–themed elimination round afterward, they made a brunch dish inspired by a military meal their grandfather had often prepared for them. The show intersperses the avuncular brothers’ teasing banter with their tender recollections of the moments they began learning to appreciate the kitchen as a space of connection—a simple revelation that nonetheless works.

The focus on simplicity shines elsewhere, too. Many of the dishes produced on Family Food Fight look appetizing, but they’re not the kind of Michelin-star culinary fare that characterizes professional cooking programs such as MasterChef. The show notes its emphasis on family recipes, and the resulting food is as accessible as Curry’s disposition. Participants are also notably diverse—the first two episodes’ families prepared dishes inspired by their roots in the American South, China, Korea, Pakistan, and Greece, among other places. Thankfully, the judges don’t attempt to litigate the cultural authenticity of the meals; contestants speak on these lineages themselves.

The interactions among family members provide the dynamism that makes show a satisfying addition to the bloated landscape of food-focused television. Family Food Fight markets itself not as an educational or cutthroat reality series, but as a show about families, in all their chaotic synergy, working together to win something. So when children make outrageous declarations about their culinary progenitors—such as when one bossy young participant suggests that “once you reach 30 you get to be your parents’ boss”—the show lets their elders respond with some necessary spice.



The first words in Homecoming, the new Netflix documentary that expands on Beyoncé’s landmark 2018 Coachella performance, come not from the singer, but from the author Toni Morrison. “If you surrender to the air, you can ride it,” the title card reads, a slightly modified quote from Morrison’s 1977 novel, Song of Solomon.

After about 15 minutes of performance footage capped by the Lemonade surprise single “Formation,” the documentary shifts to a glimpse into the process of pulling the Coachella performance together. The first thing that viewers hear after the final echoes of “Formation” is the voice of the late Nina Simone, played over recordings from some of Beyoncé’s Coachella rehearsals, which spanned eight months:*

I think what you’re trying to ask is why am I so insistent upon giving out to them that blackness, that black power, that black—pushing them to identify with black culture, I think that’s what you’re asking. I have no choice over it in the first place. To me we are the most beautiful creatures in the whole world—black people. My job is to somehow make them curious enough, persuade them by hook or crook, to get more aware of themselves and where they came from and what they are into and what is already there, just to bring it out. This is what compels me to compel them, and I will do it by whatever means necessary.

For Beyoncé, Homecoming presents another opportunity to continue the boundary-shifting, semiotic work of the Coachella performance, which itself was built on the black-feminist symbolism of Lemonade and the artistic foundation she’d established for years beforehand. The singer’s headlining 2018 set, which was nicknamed Beychella, was chock-full of references to black collegiate traditions—and also included a rendition of the black national anthem, “Lift Every Voice and Sing.” Her performance served a sly dual function: For black audiences, it was a masterly celebration of familiar traditions, including social dance; for white viewers, it was an introduction and an assertion of her deeply rooted prowess. “Instead of me pulling out my flower crown, it was more important that I brought our culture,” she says of the festival experience.
It’s fitting, then, that Homecoming is now an extension of this artistic double consciousness (and notably quotes W. E. B. Du Bois, who coined the term). Throughout the documentary, Beyoncé weaves in text and audio snippets from multiple black authors, historians, and public thinkers, most often culling from moments when they spoke directly to black audiences. The nearly two-and-a-half-hour production, which Beyoncé wrote, directed, and executive-produced, is as much a celebration of black-intellectual history as it is a concert film. (It’s also joined by a surprise live album of her Coachella set, which includes a bonus cover of the Frankie Beverly and Maze classic “Before I Let Go.”)
Early into Homecoming, Beyoncé explains the particular significance that historically black colleges and universities have held in her personal and artistic life. The Houston-born singer grew up near Prairie View A&M University and spent much of her early career rehearsing at Texas Southern University. She notes that, like Du Bois, her father is a graduate of Nashville’s Fisk University, and she always dreamed of attending an HBCU herself, but says, “My college was Destiny’s Child. My college was traveling around the world, and life was my teacher.” So when it came time for her to headline Coachella, she channeled the institutions’ distinct vibrancy: “I wanted a black orchestra. I wanted the steppers. I needed the vocalists. I wanted different characters; I didn’t want us all doing the same thing.” (She also established a scholarship program for HBCU students after last year’s performance.)

Homecoming is, of course, a product—and Beyoncé is, fundamentally, an entertainer—but it’s still thrilling to see the world’s foremost musical talent giddily dedicate so much of her massive project’s screen time to citing a diverse array of black scholars. Not all of the thinkers the artist quotes throughout her documentary are graduates of an HBCU, but Homecoming still pulses with the kind of energy that black artists harness most often when working collaboratively with their own.
Their work buoys Beyoncé and her audiences alike, and Homecoming takes care to credit HBCUs when applicable: If Howard University’s Morrison nods to the beauty of artistic surrender, then of course Beyoncé, who cheekily called herself a “black Bill Gates in the making” on “Formation,” would also quote the late businessman Reginald Lewis, a graduate of Virginia State University. Offering a simple benediction that applies to both craft and the struggle for justice, Lewis says, “Keep going, no matter what.” A quote from the children’s-rights advocate Marian Wright Edelman, a Spelman College graduate, affirms the power of representation: “You can’t be what you can’t see.” Together, these references form a refrain.

Though Beyoncé has long occupied the upper echelon of pop stardom, Homecoming’s many references to black-intellectual tradition also serve to underscore the milestone—and embarrassment—of the artist being the first black woman to ever headline Coachella, a massive music festival that’s been running for nearly 20 years. “Ain’t that ’bout a bitch?” she infamously said with a laugh onstage after thanking the festival for selecting her for the dubious honor.Homecoming broadens the artist’s accomplishment by contextualizing it within a larger body of work from black artists and theorists who toiled in—and often against—hostile, all-white institutions. Consider, for example, this selected quote from the late feminist theorist Audre Lorde: “Without community, there is no liberation.” Homecoming explains how Lorde’s words apply to Beyoncé’s artistic praxis: The documentary intentionally features black dancers, musicians, and fans from around the African diaspora, many of whom attended HBCUs. Toward the end of the film, one of the dancers notes, “Homecoming for an HBCU is the Super Bowl. It is the Coachella.” (Lorde’s insistence that “the personal is political” would also have made a fitting addition to a documentary that spends an ample portion of its run time explaining how difficult it was for Beyoncé to return to a grueling rehearsal and production schedule after the 2017 birth of her twins, Sir and Rumi.)
Though the singer notes that she’ll never again push herself as hard as she did pre-Coachella (and post-birth), she ends Homecoming with a nod to the future—and to how deeply the creative blessings of the future are influenced by the communal spaces of the past: “There is something incredibly important about the HBCU experience that must be celebrated and protected.”

*This article originally misidentified the voice that is heard after the final echoes of “Formation.” It is Nina Simone’s, not Maya Angelou’s.”



On Monday afternoon, a second woman came forward with allegations that Joe Biden had touched her inappropriately. It had happened in 2009, Amy Lappos told the Hartford Courant, when both she and Biden, then the vice president of the United States, were attending a political fundraiser in Greenwich, Connecticut. “It wasn’t sexual,” Lappos said, “but he did grab me by the head. He put his hand around my neck and pulled me in to rub noses with me. When he was pulling me in, I thought he was going to kiss me on the mouth.”

Lappos’s claim is extremely similar, in its contours, to the one made last Friday by Lucy Flores, the former Nevada state assemblywoman who also says that Biden touched her inappropriately—this time during a 2014 rally held while Flores was running to become Nevada’s lieutenant governor. In an essay for The Cut, Flores wrote that Biden had, during that event, approached her from behind while the two had been waiting to go onstage, put his hands on her shoulders, smelled her hair, and then planted “a big slow kiss on the back of my head.” It wasn’t behavior that amounted to sexual assault, Flores, like Lappos, made clear; it was behavior, she suggested instead, that invaded her space and made her deeply uncomfortable and read to her as unprofessional and demeaning and just generally—a word that has long been associated with Joe Biden—creepy.

“There’s absolutely a line of decency,” Lappos told the Courant. “There’s a line of respect. Crossing that line is not grandfatherly. It’s not cultural. It’s not affection. It’s sexism or misogyny.”

This should not require saying. The kind of behavior that Lappos and Flores are accusing Biden of engaging in is, at the very least, profoundly disrespectful. And yet the notion that Biden is simply an affectionate person—that his creepiness is merely an inevitable outgrowth of his considerable charm—has been circulating among the American media, summoned as both an explanation and an attempt at exoneration. “I am sure that somebody can misconstrue something he’s done,” Mika Brzezinski said on Morning Joe on Monday, discussing Flores’s allegation. “But as much as I can know what’s in anyone’s heart, I don’t think there is bad intent on his part at all.” Instead, Brzezinski suggested, the matter is much simpler than that: Biden, she said, “is extremely affectionate, extremely flirtatious in a completely safe way.”

Extremely flirtatious in a completely safe way. (Here, to be clear, is more from Flores’s essay: “I was embarrassed,” she writes. “I was shocked. I was confused … I couldn’t move and I couldn’t say anything. I wanted nothing more than to get Biden away from me.”)

In one way, the allegations against Biden are shocking. In another way, though, they are precisely the opposite. Flores and Lappos have accused Biden, after all, of engaging in exactly the kind of behavior that he has been repeatedly documented engaging in, over a period of years, through file photos and C-SPAN footage and the other media that steadily help to convert American politicians into American celebrities. Gawker, in early 2015, published an image essay taxonomizing the varied ways Biden has been photographed interacting—closely and intimately and publicly—with women and girls. So did New York magazine. The Daily Show offered a video-based version of the same: “The Audacity of Grope,” the segment was called. (It featured documentary footage of Biden engaged in assorted acts of woman-whispering, and culminated in Samantha Bee, the show’s fake White House correspondent at the time, appearing with the front of her blouse and the back of her skirt marked with handprints. She had just come from a meeting, Bee explained to Jon Stewart, with the then vice president.)

The women’s claims, then, are very specific allegations issued into a broader environment in which the term allegation no longer fairly applies. There is no way to broadly deny, given the documentary evidence at hand, that Biden has behaved, in the recent past, precisely the way the women claim he has. And yet Biden, who has premised the current iteration of his ever-evolving political persona largely on his championing of women—he introduced 1994’s Violence Against Women Act—found a way, despite it all, to deny their claims. He did so in regard to Flores’s allegation, via a statement delivered through his spokesman on Sunday, like this:

In my many years on the campaign trail and in public life, I have offered countless handshakes, hugs, expressions of affection, support, and comfort. And not once—never—did I believe I acted inappropriately. If it is suggested I did so, I will listen respectfully. But it was never my intention.

Biden added:

I may not recall these moments the same way, and I may be surprised at what I hear. But we have arrived at an important time when women feel they can and should relate their experiences, and men should pay attention. And I will.

The statement, polite and respectful and insisting that Biden very much believes women, even if he does not believe this particular woman, concluded with a reminder of the statesman’s bona fides as a feminist champion: He has hired women staffers, the response noted, and, in the Senate, fought “to end violence against women and ensure women are treated with the equality they deserve.” The substance of Biden’s rejoinder to Flores, however—a spokeswoman, while declining to respond to Lappos’s allegations, referred the Courant to the same broad statement—is the brief document’s introduction: “Not once—never—did I believe I acted inappropriately.” If it is suggested that he has done so, however—though the statement itself, of course, is responding to just such a suggestion—Biden will listen respectfully. “But it was never my intention.”

What is the it here, exactly? Inappropriate behavior? Biden’s own belief in the inappropriateness of that behavior? The statement takes notable refuge in the conditional tense: If. May not. May be. Can and should. But. And it allows, in the process, other people to step in where his own statement trailed off: Brzezinski, who doesn’t think there is bad intent on his part at all. Biden staffers who remain honored to have worked for him. Stephanie Carter, the wife of the former Defense Secretary Ashton Carter and the subject of one of the more iconic of the Biden-touching-women photographs: Biden “kept his hands on my shoulders as a means of offering his support,” she explained on Sunday of that image.

None of these statements were relevant to Flores’s allegation, as they had little to say about the specifics of her claim; what they permitted, however, is a kind of generalized suspension of disbelief. Many Democrats have a vested interest in seeing Biden in epic terms, as a savior and fighter and Trump-slayer; his non-apology apology—one that echoes uncomfortably the similar one he offered-not-offered to Anita Hill—allows for the mythology to live on. Biden the champion; Biden the harmless flirt; Biden, who suffered so much and means so well; Biden, who is somehow powerless against the forceful enthusiasms of his own affections. The framings allow the believers to look at all the evidence—the videos and the photos and the ear-whispers and the too-close conversations and the young girl who strains mightily to avoid the vice president’s incoming forehead kiss—and, in spite of it all, toss up their hands: Who’s to know what’s in his heart?

The affection defense is extremely familiar in its contours and related to many other common tropes: Boys will be boys; I know him and I know he wouldn’t; he said/she said and who can know beyond that; the intentional fallacy. And affection, thus deployed, does what the other defenses can do as well: It can preclude conversation. It can shroud the known facts—in this case, the photos and the videos and the testimonies of Lucy Flores and Amy Lappos—in a fog of implied unknowability. It can allow people to suggest that Flores, for example, is coming forward only because she is a partisan of Bernie Sanders, and to refuse to think more on the matter; it can encourage them to believe, incorrectly, that she has accused Biden of sexual assault, and then to complain that #MeToo has gone too far. It can cede truth to myth.

What the public deserves in all this is a robust conversation about what the kind of behavior in question here—breezy, entitled, archaic—means when it is engaged in by politicians who seek to lead the country. It certainly does not follow that the women’s accusations would disqualify Biden from the presidency; one could point out, fairly, that Biden has behaved this way with men as well. (“Joe Biden doesn’t just meet you, he engulfs you,” Mark Bowden wrote in The Atlantic in 2010, generalizing the notion of Bidenian affection. “If he’s in a chair, he’ll scoot it closer; when the furniture’s not portable, he’ll lean forward, planting his elbows on his knees, gesturing with both hands while he speaks, occasionally reaching over to touch your arm or leg for emphasis.”)

But “affection,” weaponized, prevents that conversation from happening at all. It expands to accommodate whoever else might come forward to talk about Biden’s behavior. It allows the specifics of the women’s stories—the rally, the party, the hands, the hair, the neck—to dissolve into the hazy mythology of the male leader and his penchant for harmless flirtation. “Joe Biden’s affectionate, physical style with women comes under scrutiny,” The Washington Post put it in a headline on Sunday evening. But the question remains, despite it all: What happens after the scrutiny? Joe Biden acknowledged in his statement that men should pay attention. How will he do that when he refuses to acknowledge the thing that requires the attention in the first place?



This article contains spoilers through Season 2, Episode 2 of Big Little Lies.

In the fall of 2017, in response to the expansion of the #MeToo movement, a series of articles sprang up advising parents how to talk to their children about sexual assault. Start the conversations when the kids are young, the articles commonly advised. Acknowledge that the conversations might make the kids feel uncomfortable, but don’t let the discomfort be an excuse not to have the dialogues. The advice varied, but one thing they shared was an air of resignation about the topic at hand: Parents might not be able to protect their kids from the world, the articles suggested, but at least they could help to prepare them for its sad realities.

On yesterday’s episode of Big Little Lies, viewers saw that tension in action—in one of the show’s most quietly magisterial moments to date. The single mother Jane Chapman (played by Shailene Woodley) found herself talking to her son, Ziggy (Iain Armitage), one of the second-graders at Monterey’s Otter Bay elementary school, about sexual assault—because another secret, in a city where coastal fog doubles as a metaphor, had been revealed: Ziggy had learned that Perry Wright, a parent at the school who had died at the end of Season 1, is his father. Ziggy had heard this news not from his mother—Jane herself had only recently discovered her rapist’s true identity—but rather through gossip. Chloe, the precocious daughter of Jane’s friend Madeline, had overheard her mother talking to Jane about Jane’s assault. And Chloe, being a girl fashioned fully in her mother’s image, had passed the information along to Ziggy.

And so, in Sunday’s episode of Big Little Lies, the revealingly titled “Tell-Tale Hearts,” Jane finds herself required to do what she has for so long been desperate not to: tell Ziggy the full truth about how he came to be.

The scene that results is subtle and spare. Jane finds her son in his bed, its pillows decorated with humpback whales, its frame painted with a soccer ball—a setting full of the cheerful iconography of childish refuge. Ziggy tells her that he’s known since August that Perry is his father. He tells her that he heard the news from Chloe.

“Did Chloe tell you anything else?” Jane asks.

The camera moves shakily, framing mother and son, close-up, in the light of Ziggy’s bedside lamp.

“She said something about Mr. Wright giving you salt. That’s how I happened. He salted you.” 

Jane takes in this bit of heartbreaking confusion. She shakes her head, turning away from her son so he won’t see her cry. Ziggy studies her face intently. The camera halts and hovers. “No,” Jane says, finally, wiping her eyes with the sleeves of her sweatshirt.

“Then what’d she mean?”

Jane lies down next to Ziggy, cradling his head in her arms. The camera keeps its gaze on Ziggy’s face as his mother gives him a reluctant lesson about the world and its workings. She draws in a breath. “I think what Chloe said was the word assault.”

“What does that mean?”

We never hear Jane’s answer. Instead, the camera cuts away. The flashbacks that have become so familiar in the show—the hotel room; Jane lying face-down in a bed, her face streaked with mascara and tears; the assailant slamming the door—flash on-screen once more. A wave crashes.

Big Little Lies is a show that is deeply concerned with questions of publicness and its opposite, of surveillance and its consequences. Its decision to allow Jane privacy with her son at the end of this most intimate and difficult of conversations is in one way a gesture of respect for her (she is one of the few characters on the series who doesn’t come in for some kind of subtle mockery). But it also means that the viewer is left to do the work of filling in the chilling blanks. Not “give you salt.”Assault. The mother having the talk with her son not about birds and bees, but about injustices and violence, in the son’s bedroom, surrounded by the familiar trappings of youthful innocence. The humpback whales swimming merrily on Ziggy’s pillow are characters in the scene as well. They add to its muted pathos.

The moment is made all the more powerful because, in the hermetic universe of Big Little Lies, children are often privy to an intuitive kind of wisdom. In Sunday’s episode, Skye, the daughter of Bonnie and Nathan, asks her mother whether the two are getting divorced; the young girl has sensed that something isn’t right between her parents, as much as both have tried to shield her from their problems. Similarly: “You don’t like to talk about it,” Celeste’s son Josh tells her, as she and the twins, over one of their long and moody car rides, discuss Perry’s death.

“That’s not true,” she replies.

“You like to pretend everything’s okay,” the second grader insists.

“Well, we’re a family,” Celeste says. “And a family is meant to be open and honest with each other.”

Max, Josh’s twin brother, chimes in: “I don’t think we’re that kind of family.”

He is, of course, correct. And his precision makes for a telling inversion: children who understand things more clearly than their addled adults do. The kids in the show often serve as reminders that parents can shield their children from only so much, and for only so long; that is one of the more latent tragedies lurking underneath the show’s bigger ones. Ziggy, too, has a certain clarity of vision (he tells Jane, earlier in the “salt” scene, that he hadn’t told her he’d learned about his true parentage because “I figured you’d just lie”—and he had, of course, good reason to assume that). In his confusion about “salt,” though, Ziggy is tellingly young. He evokes childhood in its most hopeful and fantastical form: brand-new, unbothered, blissful in its ignorance.

Big Little Lies is at once a soap opera and a sitcom and a gimlet-gazed commentary on capitalism and its consequences. But the show is also, humming at its lower registers, a work of horror. It talks often about monsters—in the churning seas, in the foggy skies, in the shadowed spaces where people live their lives. It frightens not through jump-scares, but by way of more intimate invitations to anxiety. On Sunday, viewers watched as a child learned that he exists because of “salt.” And on Sunday, as well, we watched as his mother, tearfully, began to disabuse him of his misunderstanding. What could be more horrifying?



This article contains spoilers through Season 2, Episode 1 of Big Little Lies.

The women of Big Little Lies spend their lives picking up the pieces men leave behind. In its first season, which was initially conceptualized as a stand-alone adaptation of the Liane Moriarty novel, the HBO series earned both critical acclaim and a touch of gendered condescension as it introduced viewers to five women navigating murder and myopia in Monterey: Madeline (Reese Witherspoon), Celeste (Nicole Kidman), Jane (Shailene Woodley), Renata (Laura Dern), and Bonnie (Zoë Kravitz). The season ended with the death of Perry (Alexander Skarsgård), Celeste’s abusive husband, who attacked her at a themed fundraiser held at their children’s elementary school—and mysteriously fell down the stairs leading up to the seaside campus.
The Season 2 premiere, which aired Sunday, finds some of the women reeling after Perry’s passing. Bonnie, who ultimately pushed him to his death while he was attacking Celeste, is undone by the weighty secret she’s forced to keep from her family. Celeste, whom Kidman plays with astonishing pathos, wavers between feeling relief at the removed threat to her life and yearning for the husband she loved. Though the other three women have largely moved on from their role in his death, the episode is titled “What Have They Done?”—and the motley crew has summarily been dubbed “the Monterey Five” by their suspicious neighbors. Perry lingers, even in death.

With the introduction of Meryl Streep, who plays Perry’s mother, Mary Louise, and whose casting single-handedly justifies the existence of the show’s second season, Big Little Lies is beginning to plumb the depths of Perry’s character. In doing so, the show excavates larger questions about masculinity and its recesses. In an early scene, Mary Louise (incidentally, Streep’s given name in real life) intervenes when her twin grandsons fight in the back seat of the car she’s driving to their first day of second grade. “Quiet! Fine young men don’t suddenly become fine young men all of a sudden in a whoosh, you know,” she spits through a prosthetic overbite. “It starts with being fine young boys, and part of being a fine young boy is listening [to] and respecting your mother.”

The fate of Celeste and Perry’s twin boys, who showed early signs of violent behavior in Season 1, hangs over the show’s second season. Celeste seems petrified that Josh (Cameron Crovetti) and Max (Nicholas Crovetti) will take after their father. In charting Celeste’s fears, Big Little Lies unfurls the kind of psychological inquiry it has mastered: Is violence inherited? Without the continuing specter of their father’s abuse, can the twins develop a healthy understanding of self, of relationships, of family?

Celeste’s twins, whose early years were spent in a house shaped by their father’s abuse of their mother, provoke much of the forward-facing analysis the new season offers. Following Perry’s death, it’s understandable that the series would home in on the far-ranging effects of his violence. Mary Louise, who injects some welcome frisson into the women’s dynamics, also inadvertently vocalizes the tensions that undergirded Celeste and Perry’s outwardly perfect relationship. “Your daddy was the most amazing man, and you were so lucky to have him. And it’s very unfair and wrong that he died, and you still feel angry about it, don’t you?” she tells Max and Josh at dinner one evening after the two have fought again. “The other day, I was with some friends and their sons were not a patch on your dad. Not a patch. I felt so angry—angry!—that their mediocre, spindly, pudgy, balding, middle-management sons were still alive, and my Perry—my Perry!—I just wanted to scream.”

Another underlying tension, of course, is that Mary Louise is the person who raised Perry. While pondering how Perry could’ve become the man Celeste knew, Season 2 also addresses a detail revealed at the end of the prior season: Perry raped Jane during a one-night stand years ago and subsequently fathered her son, Ziggy (Iain Armitage). In a gorgeously lit scene late in the premiere, Celeste asks Jane why she’s not cashing checks, presumably for back child support, from Perry. “It’s rape money, you know I can’t do that,” Jane offers, and Celeste reminds her of a financial fact that doubles as a treatise on inheritance: “Ziggy’s entitled to it. He’s part of Perry’s estate.”

The series offers plenty of nuanced commentary on Perry’s behavior, and it resists the temptation to depict masculinity as some sort of good-evil binary. Some of the show’s most deft treatment of male characters and their motivations is now emerging via the development of its less explored characters. Bonnie, for instance, is finally getting some much-needed backstory. As she distances herself from friends and family, Bonnie creates opportunities for others to bridge that gap. The Perry-shaped wedge in her marriage leads to one of the more revelatory discussions between the men of Big Little Lies.

In one conversation, Bonnie’s rugged husband, Nathan (James Tupper)—who is also Madeline’s ex—begs Madeline’s husband, Ed (Adam Scott), for help reaching out to Bonnie. “Could I ask you a big favor? Could you maybe take her out to lunch?” Nathan begs Ed. “You’ve always been better at talking to women than I have. You certainly got Madeline in a way I never could. I think you might be able to get [Bonnie] to open up, you know? You have your little way.” Ed balks at that characterization, suggesting that he’s not uniquely equipped to speak to women—and that Nathan needs to try harder, to not accept that trite essentialism.

The show could lean into depictions of the outdoorsy Nathan, who first regards his newly closed-off earth mother of a wife with fear instead of inquiry, as a stereotypically unfeeling TV husband. But later in the season, when he employs a drastic tactic to get Bonnie to speak to him again, Nathan’s voice cracks as he reveals to her just how much his divorce from Madeline shook his core, and how terrified he is of losing Bonnie and the life they’ve created together. It’s a welcome depiction of a man whose existence had thus far been largely relegated to his contentious relationship with Madeline.

The series also teases further developments among other men: Ed, for his part, gets some different shading. Jane flirts with a male co-worker who might be on the spectrum, and who first informs her of the “Monterey Five” nickname. And later episodes reveal fissures in the relationship between the tech all-star Renata, who appears on the cover of a magazine’s “Women in Power” issue, and her finance-industry dolt of a husband. Big Little Lies, which has so often been framed as a show about women behaving badly, reframes its characters’ actions and motivations not by offering new plot points, but by slowly peeling back the motivations of the men who surround them.



Does it matter that Billie Eilish, this year’s buzziest new pop star, is a kid? Is it okay that headlines about her debut album, When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, have led with phrases such as teen-pop prodigy, not your typical 17-year-old pop star, and defines 21st-century teenage angst? If labeling is passé—and Eilish’s relentlessly surprising music makes a great case that it is—isn’t it square to fixate on the number of years she’s been alive? Ageist, even? Can’t we just listen to the music?

I’m really asking because I’m trying to understand my own reaction to her rapidly exploding popularity. When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? sent me, on first listen, on a cringe binge. She opens with the slurping noise of her dental braces being removed. She sneers “Duh” in a chorus like she’s Bart Simpson. One track has a bunch of The Office samples. Another comprises ukulele and baby talk. Everything is, in one way or another, “spooky,” but in the air-quotes, kawaii sense. Think The Nightmare Before Christmas. No, think Corpse Bride. No, actually, think Monster High dolls, which update Barbie’s cayenne-cleanse proportions with Pixar-character eyes and the glamour of rotting flesh.

Do you hear what I’m doing here? How predictable, closed off, and stereotype reliant it is? My first rejection of Eilish was just a blunt reaction to brattiness as brattiness, a taking of the bait. As subsequent listens have convinced me that something very exciting is actually going on with Eilish, and as further listens have me worrying that the album might be my favorite of the year, it’s all making this mid-pack Millennial feel pretty old. Not just because of the teen signifiers Eilish uses. But because of the poise, the connections being drawn, and the sharp craft on display. How did no one make music like this before?

For what it’s worth, the comparison to Monster High is particularly unfair. Eilish—an L.A. showbiz daughter who, working with her producer brother, Finneas O’Connell, has earned millions of streams since 2016—is not plastic. Fashion-wise she goes for XL sweaters, and posture-wise she gives a good slump, which might help ensure that she won’t get railroaded as a sex-kitten object like the then-18-year-old Fiona Apple—an obvious influence—was. Generally, her edge is of the straight kind. Spiders, blood, and light S&M are motifs. But she rolls her eyes at drugs on “Xanny,” which imagines if an Amy Winehouse ballad depicted partying only as pathetic. The NC-17 teases of “Bad Guy,” the album’s opening banger, seem rather sarcastic, and the ending scene of its visual comes off like a fake-out regarding girl-on-video tropes.

Her voice—especially on her songs before this album—somewhat follows this decade’s trend of ineffably Swedish, chubby-bunny torch singing, heard in its most tolerable forms from Lorde and Ellie Goulding. But Eilish is an intelligent and unpredictable performer who, on When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, whisper-sings, whisper-raps, and whisper-hums more than she does anything that could be described as “crooning.” Cybernetic-soul vocal manipulation recalling Bon Iver and The Knife—and Kanye West’s knocking off of both—is omnipresent. O’Connell’s production follows in pleasing Yeezus style with sparse door-knock beats and jump-scare samples cut with bright, bent keyboard lines. If this all sounds a bit fussy and like ASMR bait, well, it is. But Eilish writes in melodies akin to nursery rhymes and ancient folk tunes. The balance of strange and simple usually works.

The early portions of the album trigger a sugar rush with fidgety tracks that are only a few clicks on the weirdness scale from the stuff of Taylor Swift’s Reputation. The romping is fun while it lasts, though some of the tunes feel interchangeable. Right now I’m finding myself stuck on replaying the lurching sing-along of “Wish You Were Gay,” which despite catching some Twitter flak is actually a decent corrective to the Katy Perry “Ur So Gay” tradition. Eilish isn’t shading a guy’s effeminacy; she’s just treating sexuality as no big deal by wishing that he had an ulterior motive for rejecting her. It’s not a groundbreaking sentiment, but it’s also not one that’s been expressed before in quite this manner, which makes it typical of Eilish’s relationship to originality.

The album’s deeper pleasures come later in velvety, sad ballads. O’Connell’s harmonic layers breathe and quiver while Eilish, gratifyingly, works with more ambiguous meanings than on the up-tempo songs. “Listen Before I Go” might be dicey in its romanticization of self-harm—it’s a farewell note from the top of a building—but there’s no denying its cinematic pull as the sound of police sirens fades in. On “I Love You,” the final song before an overture-as-finale track, Eilish’s performance draws a clear and breathtaking division between two modes: wanting to be too cool for desire and actually experiencing desire. It’s one more ratification that she’s not a shtick, she’s a songwriter.

If anything feels fundamentally young about the music, it’s the heaping amounts of self-identification. Eilish has decided who she is, and she wants to tell the world, with a bluntness of the sort that can soften as compromises and course corrections pile up over the years of someone’s life. She has a “soul so cynical” and renders her heartaches and head rushes in the gothic terms of sin, addiction, and secrets keeping: a pretty familiar character, really. Or maybe she—as well as other darkness-chasing chart peers—represents Gen Z cycling back to Gen X’s disaffected purity after the market-minded can-do-ism of the Millennials. (Are the Mansons of the ’90s, Shirley and Marilyn, that decade’s most underratedly relevant stars?) Now, arguing that age cohorts share some cohesive outlook is reductive. But Eilish clearly welcomes it. “We’re being ignored and it’s so dumb,” she told NME of the teens. “We know everything.”



This story contains spoilers for the episode “Striking Vipers” of Black Mirror’s fifth season. Read the rest of our show coverage here.

Romance is an underrated element of the Black Mirror multiverse. The way technology intersects with dating and love is at the center of some of my favorite episodes of the show, including Season 2’s “Be Right Back,” Season 3’s “San Junipero,” and Season 4’s “Hang the DJ.” Compared with its predecessors, Season 5’s “Striking Vipers” is a nervier, less swooning chapter, with neither the tragic tinge of the former two nor the rebellious fun of the latter. It’s a story of sublimated emotions that spill out in the strangest possible context, and a rather intriguing consideration of how online worlds can change people’s self-image, for better and for worse.

“Striking Vipers” was written by Charlie Brooker and directed by Owen Harris (who also made “Be Right Back” and “San Junipero”). At 61 minutes, it’s the shortest of Black Mirror’s offerings this year, and it’s easily the least action-packed of Season 5’s three episodes, even though it revolves around a high-tech fighting game. The very, very slow-burning plot intentionally withholds answers for most of the questions it poses about how sexuality on the internet is continuing to evolve. Still, I came to appreciate the episode’s weird, uncomfortable intimacy.

“Striking Vipers” centers on Danny (played by Anthony Mackie), who first appears as a confident 20-something man hitting on Theo (Nicole Beharie) in a club. At first, Danny acts like he’s never met Theo before and has somehow psychically guessed her drink order. But quickly, it’s revealed that they’re already dating and just pretending to be strangers to spice things up. This innocuous moment sets the stage for Danny’s overall characterization—he’s someone who feels awkward as himself. Soon afterward, viewers are introduced to Danny’s roommate, Karl (Yahya Abdul-Mateen II), a confident, hard-partying loudmouth who seems exceptionally secure in his identity. They bond over a Street Fighter–style video game called Striking Vipers, in which they each have a favorite character: Karl always plays as Roxette, and Danny chooses Lance.

The action then cuts ahead. Eleven years later, Danny and Theo have settled down into a relaxed suburban life. Karl reappears, gives Danny a gift of a new virtual-reality console, and the two do battle as Roxette and Lance again. This time, though, they’re rendered in far greater detail. The futuristic reimagining of the Striking Vipers game is the episode’s biggest technical achievement, a Scott Pilgrim–esque blend of cartoonish physics and reality. Roxette’s cyberavatar, a peroxide-blond ninja, is played by Pom Klementieff; Lance is an athletic karate expert played by Ludi Lin. The episode initially blends these actors’ voices with Abdul-Mateen’s and Mackie’s, to give viewers a sense of who’s playing as who while also underlining the extent to which the characters are bleeding into their online personas.

I just loved the way these scenes were shot. The virtual showdowns take place in a lavish 3-D arena with cherry blossoms, a Japanese garden, and a giant dragon statue in the background, poking fun at the lazily stereotypical designs of martial-arts games like Street Fighter. At first, Danny and Karl can only move horizontally right and left on a two-dimensional axis, mimicking the visual approach of old-fashioned arcade cabinets. But as they realize the extent to which they can control their characters, they start having sex with each other, and their gaming sessions evolve into a full-on cyberaffair that quickly drives an emotional wedge between Theo and Danny.

As a simmering tale of a destructive romance and early mid-life crisis, “Striking Vipers” is pretty well done. An online relationship between Danny and Karl could have played out in any number of technological mediums—message boards, online chat rooms, videoconferencing. But the video-game setting adds another layer of complexity: Brooker is wrestling specifically with how the characters’ personalities merge with and diverge from their cartoonish gaming personas. The dynamic between their avatars doesn’t “feel like a gay thing,” Danny/Lance says offhandedly at one point. And while it initially seems as if he’s repressing his true feelings for Karl, the two men don’t experience the same attraction when they attempt intimacy in real life. To Danny, that means whatever’s driving their affair can be brushed aside simply by turning the game off. Karl, however, argues that what’s drawing them together is unusual, but meaningful, and shouldn’t be ignored.

Eventually, the two try to split the difference. Though the episode ends with Danny returning to his suburban life and Karl moving to a new apartment in the city, the pair still have an arrangement to meet online every once in a while. Theo also goes back out on the town to have unspecified adventures of her own, aware of her husband’s cyberproclivities. It’s an odd, slightly melancholy conclusion to Black Mirror’s most inscrutable romance to date, one with a thoughtfully ambiguous outlook on how love and relationships can take on new dimensions in the online world.



This story contains spoilers for the episode “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” of Black Mirror’s fifth season. Read the rest of our show coverage here.

One of my favorite notions in science fiction is the copy-pasted brain. As artificial-intelligence technology grows more sophisticated, scientists and writers alike have pondered the idea of uploading one’s whole mind, and perhaps one’s very “self,” to a computer. Would a digital facsimile of a person’s consciousness count as a new person? This quandary has been explored in video games such as Soma and films such as Don Hertzfeldt’s World of Tomorrow. And it’s the most compelling of several concepts touched on in the Black Mirror episode “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too,” a bizarre and intermittently fascinating bit of pop-music melodrama.

Like every Black Mirror episode in this fifth season, “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” is more than an hour long, taking advantage of the freedom offered by Netflix (which doesn’t need to worry about ad breaks or fitting episodes into a time slot). And like most Black Mirror episodes that run more than an hour, it probably could have used some tighter editing; essentially, three big ideas are at work in Charlie Brooker’s script, and no single theme gets to dominate or develop fully. Still, “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” has enough engaging material to make it the most successful outing of the show’s latest season.

As the title suggests, there are three protagonists to this story. Rachel (played by Angourie Rice) is an impressionable teenager struggling to cope with the death of her mother, and as a result has become a bit of a wallflower at her new school. Her older sister, Jack (Madison Davenport), is dealing with the same trauma by adopting a goth look and a harsher attitude. When the episode begins, Rachel has become obsessed with a bouncy pop star named Ashley O (Miley Cyrus), whom Jack perceives as a manufactured music-industry creation. As it turns out, both sisters’ impressions are a little bit right—Ashley is a songwriting talent, but one who’s been stuffed into an unforgiving corporate machine that refuses to let her experiment. The episode follows the siblings and Ashley as they all strive to figure out what independence means to them.

The three young women are eventually united by a strange bit of merchandise called Ashley Too. A cute, six-inch-tall robot with bright-pink hair and baleful, glowing eyes, Ashley Too is pitched by the singer’s label as a sort of mini-Ashley, a cybercreation that can play music and dispense helpful platitudes. But because this is Black Mirror, far more is at work beneath the surface. Through some creative hacking, Rachel and Jack discover that this commercial product is actually a fully functioning person of sorts, a mental replica of the real Ashley trapped in a tiny plastic body.

This story thread intrigued me the most, but it arrives late in a muddled tale, a third-act plot twist in an episode that flirts with disparate themes. There are the different ways in which the two sisters’ depression manifests, with Rachel retreating into herself (and her Ashley fandom) while Jack lashes out against the world. There are the business machinations of Ashley’s label: Her manager plies her with drugs and eventually induces a medical coma in order to extract songs straight from her brain. And there’s the very real invention of a holographic musical act, called “Ashley Eternal,” whom the execs create to do all of Ashley’s work without her pesky personality getting in the way.

Any one of these concepts could support a Black Mirror episode of its own, and Brooker does a solid job interpolating them, cutting between Ashley’s betrayal by her managers and the sisters getting to know their Ashley-bot. Cyrus, a seasoned television performer in her own right, is especially charming when voicing her technological clone, who barks angrily at her owners about her right to exist and corrals them into a (superfluous) car chase to try to rescue the “real” Ashley’s comatose body. The insidious maneuverings of Ashley’s management team come across as particularly overwrought because the episode doesn’t have much time to devote to their motivations (simply put, they want money). But one scene stands out as a classic piece of grim Black Mirror humor: A grievously angry song bouncing around Ashley’s brain is modulated and smoothed out by a machine until it sounds like empty-calorie pop music.

In the episode’s climax, the robot makes the decision to unplug Ashley from life support, arguing that her human self wouldn’t want to live in a vegetative state. Ashley Too insists that Ashley will continue to exist via her own miniature form: “I’m still alive! I still count! I’m still me!” But of course Ashley’s robotic existence is different—or is it? I would’ve loved for the episode to elaborate on that debate, which instead gets brushed over as the “real” Ashley is revived from her coma and finally gets her independence. Unfortunately, “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” is more interested in providing a neat ending than in delving into the deep questions it stirs up.



This story contains spoilers for the episode “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” of Black Mirror’s fifth season. Read the rest of our show coverage here.

If the jingle that Miley Cyrus’s character Ashley O sings over the course of the Black Mirror episode “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too,” sounds familiar, that’s not just because it’s meant to scan as a generic pop song. It’s also explicitly a rewrite of “Head Like a Hole,” the 1989 Nine Inch Nails hit anti-consumerism rant. Trent Reznor’s sneer of “Head like a hole / black as your soul / I’d rather die / than give you control” becomes “Hey I’m a ho / I’m on a roll / Riding so high / Achieving my goals,” delivered by Cyrus in a pink bob and silver bodysuit. By the end of the episode, when Ashley O has achieved liberation from her villainous manager who wanted her to only ever make bubblegum music, she rocks out at a dive bar, playing the Nine Inch Nails original.

“Head Like a Hole” is a perfect pick for a touchstone here. Not only does it express the Netflix episode’s themes of greed and resistance (“God money, I’ll do anything for you!” goes the first line). Not only does Reznor’s music already seem like the sonic expression of Black Mirror’s bleak outlook and techno-thriller aesthetic (isn’t every installment, in some way, about “Happiness in Slavery”?). But “Head Like a Hole” is also, underneath the industrial guitars and grunting singer, a really fabulous, energizing pop song. It’s a testament to the way that “rock” can work as an aesthetic, an emotional mode, that meshes with candied sing-alongs—a potential symbiosis that “Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” ignores on its way to its simplistic, if amusing, pop satire.

In the episode, Ashley O is a popular entertainer who sings upbeat, empowering lyrics aimed at young female fans. Behind the scenes, though, Ashley wants to change her sound, as expressed when she looks yearningly at a rock club and when she writes a pining ballad about feeling trapped (it’s another Nine Inch Nails tune, 2005’s “Right Where It Belongs”). But Catherine, her aunt and manager, stymies her ambitions both with an ironclad contractual agreement and with a sleazy doctor who keeps Ashley on a diet of docility-ensuring drugs.

The latest brand extension for Ashley is a toy robot called Ashley Too. Crossed between an Alexa and a Furby, it’s imprinted with Ashley’s personality (building on previous Black Mirror episodes about psychic cloning) and merrily chitchats with fans who buy it. One of those fans is the 15-year-old Rachel. Shy and unpopular at school, she finds solace in Ashley O’s inspirational messaging—even if Ashley’s music makes Rachel’s indie-rock-loving older sister, Jack, sneer from her side of the bedroom. Ashley Too’s encouragement gets Rachel to perform a dance routine in the school’s talent show, but her clunky performance results in humiliation. Turns out that slogans like “If you believe in yourself, you can do anything” aren’t always what people need.

These two narrative threads—the suffering star and her worshipful fan—converge when Catherine responds to Ashley’s rebelliousness by poisoning the singer, sending her into a coma. The management team then uses technology to digitally resurrect Ashley in a more pliable form. Brain-wave scanners extract new tunes from the incapacitated songwriter, production software makes those tracks more radio-friendly, and holography generates a larger-than-life replica of Ashley that can tour the world. Meanwhile, Rachel’s Ashley Too—accidentally freed of the “limiter” programmed into it, thereby unleashing the full Ashley personality—learns of Ashley’s hospitalization on the TV. The robot and the two sisters then embark on a heist to rescue the real Ashley.

It’s a zany story that’s rich with real-world resonance. Britney Spears has been in the news lately for reported mental-health medication struggles and for seeming to chafe against the conservatorship her family set up—thereby taking control of her finances—more than a decade ago. Cyrus, a former Disney star, has faced resistance and skepticism for overhauling her sound a number of times (rap-influenced-pop in 2013; psychedelic rock in 2015; country in 2017; rap-influenced-pop again this month). The holographic pop star is not a fever dream, either. Japan’s popular entertainer Hatsune Miku is totally synthetic. The late Whitney Houston’s image will soon go on tour.

“Rachel, Jack, and Ashley Too” extends these sorts of stories for a semi-comical nightmare, adding in advanced AI as well as ethical mouse-killing technology (Rachel and Jack’s dad is an exterminator). As it imagines a pop star’s team essentially murdering her so as to profit off the ensuing nostalgia industry, the episode isn’t so much far-fetched as it is extreme. But the truth is that the gaslit, hyper-managed starlet is an old trope—as old as Hollywood—and technology has actually allowed musicians like Cyrus to push back against it. Take the example of her 2015 experimental album, Miley Cyrus and Her Dead Petz. As I wrote around the time of its release:

Theoretically, the album’s creation could be seen as a brave declaration of independence from someone long seen as a corporate-controlled, Disney-made pop puppet. Recorded without the input or money of her record label RCA, featuring heavy contributions from indie-rock legends The Flaming Lips, and unleashed without warning, for free, onto SoundCloud at the conclusion of the VMAs, it’s certainly a project without precedent. Cyrus has said her team of advisers told her “they’d never seen someone at my level, especially a woman, have this much freedom. I literally can do whatever I want. It’s insane.” They also told her that at 22 songs, Dead Petz was too long. In response, she added one more track, an instrumental called “Miley Tibetan Bowlzzz,” “not to be mean, just to prove that it can’t be too long.”

SoundCloud allowed her an end run around her label, and it sounds like management was somewhat game to let Cyrus experiment. Confident in the social-media-enabled devotion of their fans, superstars like Taylor Swift, Beyoncé, and Lady Gaga have splashily bucked convention and made risky sonic swerves as their careers have developed. Rihanna, once a steady generator of hit singles, remains as big a name as ever thanks to Instagram and her business ventures, even if her last album—the moody departure Anti—came out more than three years ago. Not everyone enjoys such freedom (again, Spears’s example seems eerily relevant), but it’s hard to say that technology’s progress has short-circuited the possibility of artistic evolution. A star who has strong enough appeal as a celebrity brand and a lifestyle totem can often push boundaries with music a bit more.

Certainly it appears that Ashley O’s brand is strong; that’s what she’s cashing in on with the Ashley Too devices. The most intriguing portions of the episode deal with that doll and with Ashley’s fans’ relationship with the star. When the pink-and-white machine chirps out motivational advice, the show is clearly playing with the way that this millennium in pop has been packed with generic self-help rhetoric, which can indeed come off as creepy or dopey. But there are fans who really do get some succor from that rhetoric. Black Mirror observes this upside, yet it also suggests there’s something sinister in Ashley Too pushing Rachel to undergo a garish makeover and to gyrate at her school’s talent show. What exactly is the problem, though? Is it that Rachel’s being told to “be herself” in an already narcissistic culture? Or is it that being herself actually amounts to becoming someone else? If Black Mirror had delved into these questions more fully, a sharper, more relevant satire could have emerged.

The show’s take on the genre is also oddly stale, relying on a textbook dichotomy between “pop” and “rock,” which corresponds to the split between the naive Rachel and the wiser Jack, and between the fakey Ashley persona and the real artist being clamped down. (One example of the level of subtlety: There’s a sticker on the wall on Jack’s side of the bedroom that says “ROCK.”) In the most fascinating scene of the episode, Jack tells Ashley Too what bands she likes—Pixies, Sonic Youth, Idles, Savages—and says she learned about them from her mother. Jack’s clearly trying to prove her hipster cred to a toy. But Ashley Too, sounding confused, asks, “So you only listen to music your mom liked?” It’s the one moment when Black Mirror seems to question the hierarchies of taste and authenticity that regularly bring ridicule to stars like Ashley and, more damagingly, to fans like Rachel. But Jack just sends the device to sleep, and the episode proceeds as an all-too-conventional romp about an artist who’d rather die than give you control.



When the then-19-year-old rapper and meme-maker Lil Nas X scored a hit by sampling a banjo, pitching his voice parodically low, and singing about “wranglers on my booty,” some in the country establishment took it as an act of mockery. But most of the nation, it appears, wanted to play dress-up too. “Old Town Road” has been the Billboard No. 1 song for 10 weeks running, spurred by a meme in which workaday suburban kids suddenly zap into flannels and 10-gallon hats. The year’s most surprising smash might seem like a distinctly internet-era phenomenon, but really, Lil Nas X is partaking in one of America’s favorite pastimes: western drag.

Bruce Springsteen is basically doing the same thing on his first original-material solo album in 14 years, Western Stars. The comparison between the “Old Town Road” single art and the Springsteen album cover—iconographic images of bucking horses—is too uncanny to go unnoticed. Decades into his career, Springsteen’s all-American routine has treated locations as far-flung as New Jersey, Nebraska, and California’s Central Valley as one great heartland united in heartbreaks and hopes. The sound doesn’t quite stay the same whenever Springsteen changes locations, but the flavor of sentimentality does. Now he’s honed in on the Southwest with a super-fussed-over production approach that bears all the authenticity of Billy Crystal in City Slickers—but also with much of the emotional precision and rockerly grandeur that’s kept Springsteen beloved over decades.

Springsteen likely wouldn’t object to having his realness questioned. Recent legacy-shoring efforts such as his 2016 memoir and his Broadway one-man show (and resulting Netflix special) have made a point of exposing the magic trick that Springsteen performs again and again: play-acting with archetypes. “Standing before you is a man who’s become wildly and absurdly successful writing about something [with] which he has had absolutely no personal experience,” he said in that Netflix special. In “The Wayfarer,” off Western Stars, Springsteen sings, “Same sad story, love and glory goin’ ’round and ’round / Same old cliché, a wanderer on his way, slippin’ from town to town.”

It’s indeed the same old cliché of Springsteen’s career—the “Thunder Road” charger who’s only ever at home on the open road—and Western Stars highlights the obvious link between his take on that character type and that character type’s intrinsic connection with American mythology. The opener, “Hitch Hikin,” boils the idea down to lullaby simplicity with finger-picked banjo and a lilting melody reminiscent of Nirvana’s “In Bloom.” The song’s narrator is a hitchhiker, and the drivers he meets—a family man, a trucker, and a “gearhead in a souped-up ’72”—all, in fact, sound like characters from Springsteen songs. There’s a plaintive tone to the tune, but it’s ultimately a celebration. On the road, the hitchhiker is “high on top of the world.”

The feeling of freedom is given plentiful backup in the album’s overall sound, which tends toward bold, hummable progressions and orchestration inspired less by country music than by Hollywood Westerns. Various brass-laden bridges have the majesty of the Magnificent Seven theme; most of the guitars reverberate with the twang of an Ennio Morricone soundtrack. Springsteen often sings in his drippiest croon—why should he worry, at this point in his career, about being called a ham yet again?—except on “Somewhere North of Nashville,” where his battle-drained rasp is more campfire appropriate. He rarely revs to a fast or frenetic tempo, but many of the tracks give the sense of drifting and then blooming, evoking when an aimless road-tripper turns a corner and opens onto a great canyon vista.

These sonic elements are beautiful in the direct manner of a polished belt buckle, but they’re counterposed with a fine thread of sorrow running throughout the songs. Springsteen’s wanderers tend to be has-beens. One track wearily voices an aging actor whose greatest screen moment was a scene with John Wayne. Another tells of a Nashville songwriter who never made it big. Another sketches a stuntman whose body barely works anymore. As the mills and factory shops of the East took a toll in Springsteen’s earlier songs, here he sings about people who sacrificed love and stability in hopes of a more glamorous kind of break.

Western Stars can thus be read as a California 49er-themed retelling of the capitalism-critiquing fables he’s been known for. Yet the politics are worn more lightly than they have been previously for Springsteen. Take “Sleepy Joe’s Cafe,” a jaunty scene piece. He sings of the purveyor of the hopping biker bar of the title:

Came home in ’45 and took out a GI loan
On a sleepy little spot an Army cook could call his own
He married May, the highway come in and they woke up to find
They were sitting on top of a pretty little gold mine

It’s quick and earthy biography that ever-so-faintly hints that modern blue-collar America still subsists on the fumes of postwar public works and the collectivist spirit they embodied. Other songs are similarly rendered in pointed detail about glory captured and then faded, such as when the album closes with an elegy for a roadside motel that once housed giddy young lovers and now has boarded-up windows and an empty pool.

While the nouns and adjectives vary from song to song, the takeaway’s often the same. The most poignant and grandiose track here, “Sundown,” tells of being stuck in a city that “ain’t the kind of place you want to be on your own.” Over lancing violins and shaggy sleigh bells, the song’s narrator pines for someone he left behind in the name of independence. Whether he’s talking about an actual place or a phase of life—see the song title for a clue at which one it might be—doesn’t matter. To songwriters like Springsteen, the West offers a trove of old towns and roads to sing about not only because they feel remote, but also because they’re so recognizable to all.



As soon as E! canceled her late-night talk show, Busy Tonight, the host and actor Busy Philipps addressed the news—where else?—on Instagram. It’s where she thrives, as one of the first and most prominent celebrities to have capitalized on social-media brand building. “I’m so proud of all of the things that we’ve done, that we’ve been able to do, and I feel the show is really successful in that way, but … I don’t know what to say,” she explained. “It does seem lame that there would be just, like, one woman in late night at a time.”

Indeed, with the end of Busy Tonight—the show aired its final episode on Thursday—Samantha Bee of TBS’s Full Frontal is now the only female late-night host still on TV. But what’s perhaps equally disappointing is the fact that Philipps’s exit came just as she had begun to find her footing as a host with a point of view.

On May 7, in response to Georgia’s new anti-abortion law, Philipps discussed the abortion she had when she was 15. She’d written about it in her memoir, This Will Only Hurt a Little, but that night, she spoke with a candor that few celebrities, let alone late-night hosts, ever express on television. She didn’t offer extra context by explaining why she had opted for the procedure; she just presented it as fact. “Maybe you’re sitting here thinking, I don’t know a woman who would have an abortion,” she said. “Well, you know me.”

This week, Philipps turned those last three words into a hashtag—#YouKnowMe—as part of a campaign encouraging women who’ve had abortions to tell their stories and help remove the stigma around the issue. “1 in 4 women have had an abortion,” she wrote on Twitter. “Many people think they don’t know someone who has, but #youknowme.”

Philipps is known for her frankness on social media, but that quality didn’t translate naturally onto Busy Tonight—not at first, anyway. The show had relatively low stakes: For four nights a week, the 39-year-old greeted her audience with a short monologue (popular topics included self-care, Oprah, and margaritas), chatted with one of her celebrity pals over drinks, and then jammed out to an artist. The vibe was, to put it in Philipps-ese, chill AF, and the aesthetic (bold hues, neon wall decor, shelves full of cute tchotchkes) was designed for Instagram picture-taking. Philipps opened each show with a lo-fi, Snapchat-style video hyping up her studio audience. She ended each one in a nightgown she called “Mr. Nightgown” while singing a lullaby to the camera.

Busy Tonight was basically one big half-hour slumber party, and it took some time for it to click. The series stumbled at the outset. Interviewing didn’t come easily to Philipps, especially when she had multiple guests. And despite her comedy-acting prowess, Philipps isn’t a comedian who’s accustomed to delivering zingers for several minutes at the top of a show or making bits—such as exchanging asides with her writers sitting in the audience—feel unforced.

But if Busy Tonight was more frothy than newsworthy, it was still, in its way, illuminating. Philipps is acutely aware of (and has admitted to) how her openness on social media has netted her more opportunities than her acting—on Freaks and Geeks, Dawson’s Creek, and Cougar Town—ever did. She understood that the fans tuning in were doing so because they had followed her online and liked how brassy she was there; that when she mentioned “Marc,” they’d know she meant her husband, the screenwriter Marc Silverstein; and that all of this—being the center of attention on her own show after a lifetime of supporting roles—was utterly new to her, as a longtime TV actor.

As a host, Philipps toggled between being confident and self-deprecating, charming and awkward, bringing to late night not just a rare female presence but also a breezy, experimental energy. When a joke failed to land, she acknowledged it. When she made jarring transitions in her monologue, she called herself out. When she didn’t know about something in the pop-culture zeitgeist, she leaned into it. (In an episode with Geena Davis, Philipps revealed that she hadn’t watched a single Marvel movie, including “the one where they’re in a spaceship and there’s a raccoon.”)

Since Philipps is a well-connected star, her interviews tended to be fun and lighthearted; occasionally, she’d make her friends dive into gossip that could fuel headlines. She grilled a sick but still game Andy Samberg on being a sex symbol. She made her former frenemy Chad Michael Murray revisit their time together on Dawson’s Creek. She coaxed an impressive Matthew McConaughey impression out of her best friend Michelle Williams. “You’ve ruined me ever doing another talk show again,” Mandy Moore tweeted after her appearance on Busy Tonight. “No one can compete.”

Even with the YouTube star Lilly Singh poised to replace the retiring Carson Daly and take over Last Call this fall, the late-night landscape—with its dominant lineup of Jimmys—remains relatively women-free. Sure, newcomers overall have it rough (think The Joel McHale Show and The Opposition With Jordan Klepper), but male hosts more often get the chance to work through the learning curve. Seth Meyers didn’t figure out how to reinvent the monologue until more than a year into his gig. James Corden’s “Carpool Karaoke” didn’t become a sensation until Adele’s edition in Season 2. Female hosts, however? Even the shows on streaming sites that don’t have to abide by TV schedules failed to survive. Netflix canceled Chelsea Handler’s Chelsea in late 2017 after two seasons and axed Michelle Wolf’s The Break after 10 episodes in August. A month earlier, BET ended Robin Thede’s The Rundown. And in January, Hulu opted not to renew Sarah Silverman’s I Love You, America.

Now Philipps has gone off the air, right when she appeared to be figuring out how to make her show work. Her discussion about abortion was broadcast the day after the cancellation news broke, and her final episode demonstrated how far she’d come as a host. She landed every joke by embracing her rambling sensibility. (“I just want to give you a statistic: There are more men named Todd in the entertainment industry than there are women,” she began one. “I, actually, we made that up. I don’t know if that’s true. But it feels true; it feels right.”) Philipps welcomed her famous friends Linda Cardellini, Michelle Williams, Jennifer Carpenter, Whitney Cummings, and Christa Miller for a conversation that could’ve devolved into cross talk, but instead flowed smoothly with banter and tears. The half hour ended with Philipps singing one last lullaby before shedding Mr. Nightgown and exiting her studio to cheers from her staff—a mostly female creative team led by Caissie St. Onge and that also includes Philipps’s sister, segment producer Leigh Ann Dolan.*

The team looked ready to party; after all, Busy Tonight doesn’t have to be over for good. Philipps is shopping the series to other networks, and in April, she hinted at the show’s developing point of view. “Our show is political. It’s just not necessarily partisan,” she told the Los Angeles Times. “But … having a woman on television in late night is inherently political. And my body is political, and me talking casually about bleeding and my period … and talking freely about sexuality and women’s bodies is an act of defiance.” The show was just beginning to find a way to express that defiance—and if other late-night hosts are allowed time to push through growing pains, shouldn’t Busy Philipps get a chance, too?

*This story previously misstated the role of the producer Leigh Ann Dolan. We regret the error.



Toward the end of the first episode of Fosse/Verdon, the dancer Gwen Verdon (Michelle Williams) has finally flown to Munich at the beseeching of her husband, the choreographer and director Bob Fosse (Sam Rockwell). Fosse is directing the film adaptation of Cabaret, starring Liza Minnelli as a nightclub entertainer in Weimar Berlin, but things are going awry: The shoot is behind schedule, the costumes are all wrong, and Fosse is locked in a battle of wills with the movie’s producer, Cy Feuer (Paul Reiser), over their divergent ideas about what Cabaret should be. But then Verdon arrives. She dresses Minnelli in a backless black brassiere from her own closet; she melts crayons to apply black wax to dancers’ arachnid eyelashes and calms them by whispering character backstories in ASMR-tingly tones. Verdon also translates Fosse’s dark, corrupted vision for Cabaret into words Feuer can understand. “Boy, I wish you’d been here from the start,” Feuer replies, patting her on the arm. “He needs you.”

The kind of work that Verdon does on Cabaret, alas, is not the kind of work movie studios give credits for. Fosse’s labor is creative; Verdon’s, in this instance, is emotional. He is, Fosse/Verdon points out, almost useless without her, a fact that Rockwell’s Fosse is only too aware of, even if it never occurs to him to respect her for it. She’s the unpaid, unrecognized ballast to his overinflated genius balloon. In the series, when Fosse subsequently accepts the Academy Award for Cabaret in 1973, Verdon watches the ceremony at home with their daughter, Nicole.

Seeing a television show stick a pin in the “great man” bubble is gratifying, and FX’s Fosse/Verdon, which debuts Tuesday, is sharp enough to measure the mythology of so many Male Genius stories. Produced by Hamilton’s Thomas Kail and Lin-Manuel Miranda with the Dear Evan Hansen writer Steven Levenson, the eight-part series is simultaneously in thrall to Fosse as a legend of musical theater and critical about his excesses. It’s a tricky high-wire to walk, and Fosse/Verdon tries to manage it by positioning Verdon as Fosse’s counterforce, the backwards-and-in-high-heels feminine yin to his fiery masculine yang. In reality, though, her character is less equal and more reactive: Fosse erupts, Verdon soothes. He creates, she nurtures. He cheats, she endures. Both are plagued by perpetual sounds they hear inside their heads—the staccato of tap shoes for Fosse, and the wailing of an abandoned baby for Verdon. Balance is necessary for great art, the show emphasizes. This approach is a graceful one, storytelling-wise, but what it neglects to underline, at least in the first five episodes, is that Verdon was an artist, too.

There’s a difference, after all, between collaborator and muse. One implies partnership, the other passivity. In Fosse/Verdon, when Fosse is choreographing scenes, he tends to shape dancers like inanimate balls of clay, tilting a leg or splaying a knee, repositioning bodies that are too rote or too pleasing. His aesthetic isn’t one of bright, smiling vigor or neat Busby Berkeley synchronicity. He wants movement to reflect effort, pain, reality. “I wanna see the sweat. I wanna see the spot where they missed their foundation,” Rockwell’s Fosse yells in the first episode, when he’s directing the movie adaptation of Sweet Charity. Such is his commitment to verisimilitude that for Cabaret, he hires Munich sex workers to play patrons at the Kit Kat Club.

Not everyone understands what he’s doing. But Verdon instinctively does. The most striking scene in the series so far is a flashback to 1955, when Fosse and Verdon first meet prior to rehearsals for Damn Yankees. Verdon, irritated at having to endure what she believes is an audition with an upstart choreographer, arrives with a pasted-on smile and an air of nonchalance. (“I didn’t see your show,” she tells Fosse, who replies, “I didn’t see yours, either.”) Lola, the character Verdon is playing, is a seductress, and Verdon is initially disconcerted by Fosse’s interpretation of Lola as a past-her-prime burlesque queen. But as soon as they start dancing, she gets it. She improvises an errant leg itch that deglamorizes the character even more. Fosse is enthralled. The scene has a crackling, meeting-of-the-minds zip that suggests an unleashing of creative energy for them both.

What follows, though, feels much more like standard biopic fare. In part, that’s because of the source material. Fosse/Verdon is adapted from Sam Wasson’s 2013 biography of Fosse, a book that delved into the predilections and demons of one of Broadway’s defining stylists. Verdon is, at best, an ancillary character, and so the series simply has less to draw on when it comes to her life and work. Originally, Fosse/Verdon was conceived as a series about a single subject, but after the reverberations in Hollywood following allegations against Harvey Weinstein and hundreds of other powerful men in 2017, the show was reconceived around Fosse and Verdon’s partnership. The idea, Levenson told The New York Times, was to probe the dynamics of creative alliances, and to question why men tend to be remembered and women sidelined.

Question asked and answered: Fosse’s personality in the show is so overpowering that it tends to engulf everything around it. Scenes play out as if viewers are seeing them from inside the director’s head, experiencing the swings between his hyper-ego and his crashing insecurity. In one scene, after a box-office failure, we see him dart nimbly out of a chair, across the room, and out an open window, as if he’s imagining the choreography of his own suicide. In another, Fosse arrives at a studio to edit Cabaret, and interprets his walk down a hallway as a dance sequence, complete with women in candy-colored dresses revolving around him, and a jaunty moment of hat play. Minutes later, after a disappointment, Fosse leaves, but instead of walking out, he’s dragged by editing equipment that wraps around his feet like an anchor.

These moments are ingenious, and they bring a vibrant theatricality to the series. Other interludes communicate Fosse’s various addictions: pills (uppers and downers rattle as reliably as percussion in his hand), unfiltered cigarettes, and women. Even as Fosse/Verdon considers why Fosse might have been so obsessively priapic—his early sexual history, for what it’s worth, is remarkably similar to Don Draper’s—it never expects you to sympathize with him. In one scene, Fosse tries to force himself upon a dancer who’s rehearsing Pippin with him, only to cut her from a number after she knees him in the crotch. When Verdon confronts him after discovering that he’s having an affair with a German translator, he tells her that all he wants is to “be able to see Hannah and then come home and not bullshit you.” “Maybe I should find a lover too, then,” she replies. “That’s not your style,” he says, primly.

Rockwell, counterintuitively, tends to downplay Fosse, making the character feel more like an observer than anything else. Everything he says and does is conducted at a relatively even tempo, which somehow makes the contrast between highs and lows feel more disturbing. Even when Fosse is in a psychiatric institution and heavily medicated, he sees the world as a backdrop, watching the other patients raise their heads in synchronized grace. What’s most striking about Fosse/Verdon is how it captures Fosse’s motivations—how fiercely he wanted to take the edge off Broadway’s megawatt, sanitized cheeriness. In his hands, a mambo for Damn Yankees becomes a testament to the physical ordeal of performing. “That’s what we do, isn’t it?” Fosse asks Verdon. “We take what hurts and we turn it into a big gag, and we’re singing, and we’re dancing, and the audience, they’re yukking it up, they’re laughing so hard they don’t realize that all they’re laughing at is a person in agony, a person who’s peeled off his own skin.”

Williams inhabits her role as Verdon, reconstituting herself so thoroughly as a middle-aged, disappointed stage actress that she’s hard to recognize. Her voice is pitch-perfect, mannered and illusive, and her physicality as a dancer conveys Verdon’s understated magnetism. But it’s hard not to feel like she’s underserved by the material, which presents her as a partner first and a performer second. With Fosse, the show is clear that there’s no boundary between the artist and the man: The scenes in which his memories and daydreams bleed into the reality the audience perceives make that much clear. The show offers flashes inside Verdon’s head—images of her and Fosse together, and glimpses of a lost friend—but they lack the defining aesthetic of Fosse himself, the caustic, sleazy, bewitching glamour that Fosse/Verdon has shaped itself around. Verdon helped shape Fosse’s career, the series makes clear. What’s less easy to see is how she might have shaped her own.



Update your glossary: Pop music no longer means “music that’s popular.” Clubby thump, breathy wails, mathematically engineered hooks, rhyming fire and desire and higher—the bundle may be going the way of big-band or nu metal, from central to niche. The latest sign of the shift is that Taylor Swift’s animatronic new single failed to dethrone a country-rap novelty from No. 1. Before that, The New York Times reported the end of a “one-size-fits-all” solution for hits, and Pitchfork kicked off a pan with, “Pop is dead; here is its corpse; here is Diplo attempting to make the corpse dance.”

For all her great charms, Carly Rae Jepsen has long seemed like the melodious canary in modern music’s coal mine. When the Canadian Idol runner-up landed “Call Me Maybe” as 2012’s breakout smash, it was a classic tale of sweet bubblegum conquering all. Yet even though her albums, 2012’s Kiss and 2015’s Emotion, were as clever and winsome as that hit—though maybe a half-degree less catchy overall—they were not the juggernauts that other eras might have made them. Instead, they became something that seems the opposite of pop: cult favorites. Girlish, lovelorn sing-alongs of the sort often unfairly dissed as “generic” had suddenly found themselves with a highly specific constituency bridging the indie-rock club and the gay video bar.

If music like Jepsen’s has been losing its ubiquity, it would stand to reason that it’s because the formula has exhausted all its possible permutations. How many times can “Thriller” and “Like a Virgin” and “Just Dance” get rewritten? Sure enough, the first singles for Jepsen’s latest album, Dedicated, did give the impression of someone stuck in a pleasant cul-de-sac. The synthetic sparkles and volcanic choruses of “Now That I Found You” and “Party for One” work as spectacular calisthenic fodder, but they don’t pack much surprise.

Yet dig more deeply into Jepsen’s new album, Dedicated, and you hear signs of a genre worth preserving. With her spry and youthful-seeming voice, Jepsen has long found ways to inject new vibrancy into the clichés of romance (a goal accomplished, for example, with the simple complication of maybe in “Call Me Maybe”). She’s talked, for this album, about wanting to make “chill disco” and about becoming “more confident in my weirdness.” These statements nail the strengths of Dedicated, whose highlights make the case that pop has a point beyond selling records: paying tribute to the wildness of human emotion in a controlled, reassuring format.

Skip to track four for a dazzling and hilarious distillation of this idea. Produced by Jack Antonoff, “Want You in My Room” blasts past any stigmas about “good taste” to evoke a rom-com set in a bouncy castle. Amid Fisher-Price congas, “Paradise City” guitars, and Daft Punk robo-vocals, a series of short and varied exclamations ricochet with an odd sort of grace. The effect is cheesy, yes, but imagine a fine Camembert disguised as a Kraft Single. When a saxophone erupts in the third minute, it’s nearly as joyful as the one on Jepsen’s 2015 classic “Run Away With Me,” except for one bummer factor: the song’s about to end.

That’s okay, though, as what arises next is just as strange and brilliant. “Everything He Needs” reworks something Shelley Duvall mewled to Robin Williams in the 1980 film Popeye into a psychedelic take on lust. The chorus has Jepsen making a hiccuping sort of ascent, like someone hopping a staircase two steps at a time. Saloon piano, funky laser noises, and two manipulated vocalists—one low and spooky, one a digitized opera squeal—jeer along, with increasing hysteria. For the bridge, spoken word turns to hallucinogenic slurring—“not just physically ... emotionally … spiritually … intellectually ... sexually”—before fish-tank bubbles go pop. It’s way better camp than anything at the Met Gala.

Later in the album, “Real Love” cements Dedicated’s triumph. Whereas “Want You in My Room” and “Everything He Needs” use uncool sounds for kooky fun, this track has trendier ingredients: new-new-wave synths trembling like so many lower lips, and a post-chorus EDM explosion. She bends the template for a moving story, still. A breakup is on Jepsen’s mind, but she’s less torn up than giddy for the next romance. “I’m not even scared,” she gasps, for true love is nourishment, and she’s “been feeling weak without it.” Just as the first swell of ecstasy seems imminent, the music pulls back, almost cruelly. When the much-anticipated party finally does crash in, it absolutely communicates the sating, the recharging, that Jepsen craves.

Between those three godlike bops, Dedicated serves up satisfying twists on the familiar. The album opens with a one-two dosing of slow disco enlivened by tangy chords and velvet harmonies. Some of the strongest hooks on the album—“Too Much,” “The Sound,” “For Sure”—are used in a restrained way, chanted and cooed as the arrangements give the sense of traversing a color gradient. Other tracks chase a more straightforward jolt while detouring to different subgenres: a No Doubt rock gallop on “I’ll Be Your Girl,” Motown spunk on “Feels Right.” Throughout, layers of fine detail reveal themselves: strange voices buried deep, reverb that bends and morphs into an instrument in its own right.

Has Jepsen found the future of pop? No, probably not. The drowsy defiance and anything-goes looseness of the rap and rap-influenced artists who constitute what’s actually popular lately remain far away. Jepsen’s not in dialogue with anyone but herself. Yet Dedicated shows that working within the confines of an ailing genre does not speak to a lack of ambition. As with all great pop, Jepsen’s songs are easy to enjoy. They’re also worthy of that thing she can’t help but keep singing about: obsession.



The central character in Hulu’s new six-part miniseries Catch-22, Captain John Yossarian (played by Christopher Abbott), is nicknamed Yo-Yo, aptly so, since he spends the entirety of the story being yanked back and forth on a fragile cord between life and death. Catch-22 isn’t a perfect adaptation of Joseph Heller’s 1961 book of the same name—both because it’s a four-hour television drama instead of a 450-page novel and because perfectly adapting Heller’s satirical, tart narrative for the screen is probably impossible. But in the sense that a TV show can capture the spirit of something, Catch-22 is magical, maddening, tender, and caustic in equal measure. Its upside-down logic confronts you with the beauty of life and the monstrousness of a war whose only objective is to snuff that beauty out at every opportunity.

Like Heller’s book, Catch-22 launches in the middle of things, although it reworks the nonlinear structure of the book into a more chronological framework. In the first episode, Yossarian is a bombardier completing his pilot training at the Santa Ana Army Air Base. He’s plagued by a puffed-up lieutenant obsessed with military parades (George Clooney), consoled by the lieutenant’s comely wife (Julie Ann Emery), and hopeful that World War II might be over by the time he actually encounters it. Two months later, Yossarian is stationed in Pianosa, Italy, trying to complete a mission count that Colonel Cathcart (Kyle Chandler) keeps increasing every time the pilot gets close. Desperate to stay alive, Yossarian consults the camp doctor (Grant Heslov), who tells him about the catch-22 that governs getting out of combat duty: Anyone who wants to fly is crazy enough to be grounded, but anyone who declares himself to be crazy is obviously sane enough to fly.

This feeling of circular logic as a noose tightening around Yossarian’s neck, coupled with the frenetic energy of the first few episodes and the introduction of a fleet of supporting characters, can make it hard to get absorbed in the action early on. Catch-22, for all the time it spends looking at its protagonist, lingering over Abbott’s flaring nostrils and clenched jaw, gives little sense of who Yossarian actually is, or where he comes from, or what he wants, besides his immediate imperative of staying alive. As with the book, all we get of Yossarian is his presence, like he’s Sisyphus trapped in the underworld and bombs are his boulder. Initially, this distance feels alienating, but Abbott’s performance is so magnetic and so multidimensional that it’s hard not to be drawn in. The first time Yossarian registers the death of a fellow pilot, his face twitches almost imperceptibly. The second time, a much bloodier event that follows a jaunty sequence scored to Benny Goodman’s “Goodbye,” he seems to visibly fracture in front of the camera, as if you can watch his spirit degrading.

This constant flux between light and dark, farce and fatalism, is borne out in the miniseries’ stylistic elements. Clooney, Heslov, and Ellen Kuras take turns directing, all finding balance between scenes of striking loveliness and stark horror. The color palette has a kind of yellowing sepia tone, drawing out the dustiness of camp and the heat of explosions, but making the blue of the Mediterranean more cooling by comparison. The nail-biting action of the combat scenes is contrasted with carefree interludes of the pilots horsing around in the sea: swimming, drinking beer, diving, and dunking one another with a joy that’s as radiant as an aftershave commercial, and as short-lived. Even Yossarian, who stores tension inside every atom of his body, seems to relax in the water.

These fleeting moments of calm aren’t in the book, but on-screen they offer some respite from the claustrophobic irrationality of Catch-22’s events. The series’ writers, Luke Davies and David Michôd, excise some of the uglier moments, such as Yossarian groping a nurse whom he later starts a sexual relationship with. But they double down on the absurdity and doublespeak embedded in the story, in which any desired outcome can be logically reasoned and any truth also embodies its opposite. Chandler’s Colonel Cathcart, a sweating, grimacing, stuffed-khaki-shirt of an officer, demonstrates his bravery by sending other men to their death, and “punishes” Yossarian for an infraction by promoting him and giving him a medal. Yo-Yo’s comrades, meanwhile, get riled up by his persistent panic in Pianosa. “You know the difference between me and you?” McWatt (Jon Rudnitsky) tells him in one scene. “Me: happy happy happy. Dead. You: worry worry worry. Dead. Don’t drag me into your shit.”

While the pared-down plot of Catch-22 means the series almost never drags (a rarity for a streaming show), the flip side is that some supporting characters lose their significance. Aarfy (Rafi Gavron), a pipe-chewing co-pilot who commits a truly monstrous act on a weekend in Rome, seems more like a cipher in the series than what he represents in the book—the ability for American privilege to insulate itself from justice and justify anything it feels like doing. Milo (Daniel David Stewart), a profiteer who embodies the ludicrous essence of unfettered capitalism, gets more attention, but the scale and complexity of his scheming can be confusing. Tessa Ferrer, as Nurse Duckett, also seems capable of doing more than the show allows her space for.

Still, in its final episodes Catch-22 finds its emotional core, as well as its best moments of tragicomedy. There are scenes I can’t stop thinking about for the quiet ways in which they illustrate the cost of conflict, as well as set pieces that take your breath away with their synchronized grace and then their arbitrary horror. Through it all, Yossarian is the lens through which viewers see war, a self-confessed coward who’s by far the bravest man in a battalion. Catch-22, again, isn’t perfect, because Heller’s book is far too prickly and paradoxical for an easy interpretation. But it’s almost always faithful to what Heller wanted to communicate and—in its finest scenes—transcendent.



There’s a scene early in Chernobyl where a man pries open a metal door and accidentally looks right into the exposed core of a nuclear reactor—a blinding, lethal, white snowstorm of poison and chaos that scorches him where he stands. This is, you might reason, not a bad metaphor for life online in 2019: the surprises, the gravitational yank of innocuous portals, the toxic aftershock. And then one episode later, Ulana Khomyuk (played by Emily Watson) has a conversation with a Soviet apparatchik about the “incident” at Chernobyl that brings the analogy fully home. “I’ve been assured there’s no problem,” the bureaucrat says. “I’m telling you that there is,” Khomyuk replies. “I prefer my opinion to yours,” he says. “I’m a nuclear physicist,” she counters, adding, “Before you were deputy secretary, you worked in a shoe factory.”

Craig Mazin (The Hangover Part II and III, Scary Movie 3 and 4), who created and wrote all five episodes of Chernobyl, isn’t being subtle here. When societies undermine not only expertise but also the nature of truth itself, he seems to be saying, catastrophe inevitably follows. Hence the twitchy panic the first hour of Chernobyl induces as it charts the immediate aftermath of the infamous 1986 explosion at a nuclear power plant in northern Soviet Ukraine. After an opening interlude in which Valery Legasov (Jared Harris) records his memories on cassette tapes that he hides from the KGB, the series jumps back two years, to mere seconds after reactor No. 4 has apparently blown up. While a series of junior engineers try to grapple with the scale of the crisis, their supervisor, Anatoly Dyatlov (Paul Ritter), rejects their analysis and berates them for being hysterical. “We need to get water moving through the core,” he urges. “There is no core,” an engineer replies. “It exploded. The core exploded.” In other words, it’s not the kind of event that’s discussed in the training manual.

This is essentially how the miniseries proceeds: Scientists grow extremely alarmed at the fact that there’s an open uranium core gushing trillions of particles into the air every hour; government officials respond that such a crisis is inconceivable and they should just put the fire out already. (“The official position of the state,” a character says at one point, “is that global nuclear catastrophe is not possible in the Soviet Union.”) Harris’s Legasov, a nuclear physicist, is called in to help, although almost everything he says is ignored. The action veers between ludicrous, Death of Stalin–style farce (the radiation level is reported as 3.6 roentgens per second, since that’s as high as the counters go) and grindingly tense body horror (babies burned bright red, incessant retching, open sores). Johan Renck, who directed all five episodes, instills a sense of visceral fear that culminates in one striking scene where nearby townsfolk bask joyfully with their children under falling flakes of deadly nuclear ash.

For Legasov, Watson’s Khomyuk, and Boris Shcherbina—a party official charged with overseeing the crisis, played by Stellan Skarsgård—the challenge is two-pronged: They have to somehow contain a leak that could kill millions of people, and contaminate farmland and drinking water for centuries, while wrestling with officials who deny the evidence offered by their own eyes. (“You didn’t see graphite on the ground,” Dyatlov rants in one scene, shortly before vomiting and passing out. “You didn’t. Because it’s not there.”) Khomyuk has a kind of whisper network of fellow female scientists who convey coded information over bugged phones using the periodic table. Shcherbina growls, furrows his brow, and calls Moscow. Legasov delivers speeches that convey surprisingly thorough and digestible information on how nuclear reactors work while also putting the Chernobyl disaster in context. The fire they’re looking at, he explains in one scene, “is giving off nearly twice the radiation of the bomb in Hiroshima, and that’s every single hour.”

All three actors are titans, and they manage to carry off dialogue that could be cumbersome in lesser hands. Skarsgård and Harris both exude weariness like perspiration, with Harris’s features stretched permanently into a grimace and Skarsgård so craggy, he seems carved out of granite. In one scene, Shcherbina delivers a speech about the Soviet history of endurance and sacrifice that’s memorably rousing and nihilistic at the same time. Watson has the quieter, subtler role, but there’s rarely a scene in which her presence doesn’t command attention. She plays Khomyuk with a gentle, semi-Slavic intonation that serves the character and tends to be less distracting than the aggressively English accents of almost everyone else. While not much wears faster than bad Vladivostok burrs from RADA-trained artists, the cadences here are so extremely British that cultural dissonance sometimes sets in.

Mazin clearly wants to get at the scope of the disaster by looking at the breadth of the lives it affected, meaning that there are subplots involving a firefighter’s stranded wife (Jessie Buckley) and the conscripted soldiers charged with killing all the irradiated pets left behind. But without time to really dig into their stories, these plotlines divert from the more urgent intrigue of how Chernobyl might be abated. (David Dencik is wonderful as Mikhail Gorbachev, who declares, in one scene, that Soviet power comes from “perception of our power,” which is why it’s so necessary to keep the truth about the crisis contained.) Some scenes feel sluggish, though the best moments toggle between frantic action and leisurely, deliberate style. Renck particularly seems to relish the ’70s aesthetic of the Soviet Union, pausing over swirled carpet patterns in shades of brown and clashing umber curtains.

Chernobyl is a thorough historical analysis, a gruesome disaster epic replete with oozing blisters and the ominous rattle of Geiger counters, and a mostly riveting drama. But it’s also a warning—one that straddles the line between prescience and portentousness. Whether you apply its message to climate change, the “alternative facts” administration of the current moment, or anti-vaccine screeds on Facebook, Mazin’s moral stands: The truth will eventually come out. The question he poses, however self-consciously, is whether hundreds of thousands of lives must always be sacrificed to misinformation along the way.



On Sunday morning, Rudy Giuliani, as he so reliably will, made news on cable news: Appearing on the CNN show State of the Union, the president’s lawyer turned surrogate told Jake Tapper that—despite the Mueller report having found insufficient evidence to conclude that the Trump campaign had colluded with a hostile power in the run-up to 2016—there’s “nothing wrong with taking information from Russians.” The revealing goal-post displacement got as much attention as you’d expect, and that meant that something else got attention as well, as video of Giuliani’s comment pinged around the internet: the April 22 event that CNN has been advertising, in recent days, with gladiatorial gusto. “CNN PRESIDENTIAL TOWN HALLS: TOMORROW,” went the chyron underneath the viral “Giuliani: ‘Nothing Wrong’ With Getting Info From Russians” clip. The graphic helpfully informed viewers about the timing of that event: back-to-back town halls featuring Amy Klobuchar (at 7 p.m. ET), Elizabeth Warren (8 p.m.), Bernie Sanders (9 p.m.), Kamala Harris (10 p.m.), and Pete Buttigieg (11 p.m.). The coverage, CNN’s chyron promised at one point, via a countdown clock aired later on Sunday, is “25 HRS 45 MIN 20 SEC” away.

It wasn’t that long ago that cultural critics worried about TV’s way of turning politics into a form of amusement, coining terms such as infotainment and media events to convey anxieties about what happens when the high stakes of politics collide with the low ones of daily distraction. Those days seem quaint now, and they seem quainter still when CNN spends weeks plugging the quintuple-header that it is hosting on Monday in conjunction with the Harvard Kennedy School’s Institute of Politics. Town halls, merging the intimacies of direct democracy with the implied distance of the TV screen, are throwback events that also neatly capture some of the tensions of politics as they’re practiced in the present: They marry versions of policy wonkery—discussions of health care, immigration, education, gun safety—with the primary-colored flashiness of cable news. And they tangle the promises of American politics with the demands of American celebrity.

In the months-long lead-up to Monday’s combined event, Kamala Harris did a town hall; Cory Booker did a town hall; Bernie Sanders did a town hall; Elizabeth Warren did a town hall; John Hickenlooper did a town hall; Tulsi Gabbard did a town hall; Howard Schultz did a town hall; Pete Buttigieg did a town hall; Amy Klobuchar did a town hall. There have been many more. Each appearance has tested not only a given candidate’s stances on some of the issues that will be at play in 2020, but also broader questions: What does political charisma look like now that the definition of that quality may finally be expanding? What does an American leader act like in the year 2019?

The town halls work, basically, like this: They put presidential candidates and potential voters together in a single room, to exchange ideas—a mass-mediated version of the flesh-pressing politics that used to be, and in some formats remains, the American norm. In CNN’s version, members of the audience, preselected for the opportunity, ask questions of the candidates, typically reading—and sometimes shaking with understandable nervousness—from slips of paper; the candidates answer the questions; the audience, often, applauds. (The crowds are frequently but not always self-declared supporters of the candidates.) The moderators of the events—CNN anchors such as Tapper, Don Lemon, Erin Burnett, and Wolf Blitzer—occasionally intervene, asking their own questions or following up when a candidate has neglected to answer an audience member’s query.

“Oh, this is fun!” Elizabeth Warren exclaimed during the town hall she held in March. The remarkable thing was that she appeared to have meant it.

For the audience, part of the appeal of the town halls comes from the fact that they can be much more than fun: They are also thoroughly high-stakes for the politicians participating in them. Buttigieg has risen in the polls and in the national conversation in part because of his performance last month at his (first) CNN town hall, before an audience at the South by Southwest festival in Austin. “Buttigieg Feels Momentum After CNN Town Hall, With $600K Raised in 24 Hours,” a headline—from CNN—went, a few days after the March 10 event concluded, citing numbers from a Buttigieg campaign aide. CNN wasn’t alone in that analysis: In a piece explaining the recent “Buttigieg boom,” Vox traced the bump in attention and funding to the South Bend, Indiana, mayor’s “breakout performance at a CNN town hall in early March.” Google Trends agrees with the assessment: It records the search interest in “Pete Buttigieg” as spiking in mid-March—just after he joined Tapper on CNN’s makeshift stage.

The town halls, in that way, can have the feel of a religious ritual: They profess a faith in the power of the political conversion experience. They assume that there are minds, among both studio audiences and those watching at home, that are capable of being changed. Last week, Sanders appeared at a town hall on the Fox News channel, an event co-moderated by the anchors Martha MacCallum and Bret Baier, and the collision of left and right resulted in … a small political victory for the democratic socialist. “By the end of the town hall,” Vox noted, “audience members were booing the occasional Baier or MacCallum follow-up, even doing call-and-response with Sanders.”

For CNN, the town halls offer a different kind of proposition: They offer ratings without an overt admission of political partisanship. In March, CNN’s average audience from 7 p.m. to 11 p.m. ET numbered 884,000, while Fox’s was 2.66 million and MSNBC’s was 2.12 million. The latter networks use that time for opinion shows that in turn bring in audiences. And the town halls, Reason’s Matt Welch notes, have offered CNN some fairly reliable ratings bumps: Harris’s first town hall, on January 28, brought in 1.96 million viewers; Klobuchar’s brought in 1.17 million; Warren’s brought in 1.09 million.

And, so: As the Democratic field grows, so do the events that promise to showcase that field’s hopefuls to potential voters. On April 9, Kirsten Gillibrand participated in one with Burnett. On April 10, it was Washington Governor Jay Inslee (with Blitzer). On April 11, it was former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro, with Lemon. On April 14, the network hosted a doubleheader with the businessman Andrew Yang and the author Marianne Williamson—the latter of whom is perhaps best known as Oprah Winfrey’s spiritual adviser. These are opportunities for candidates and for CNN itself, which also uses the events to practice a version of vertical integration. CNN hosts the town halls, using its anchors as moderators; it airs the events; and then it reports on the town halls’ happenings, dividing their action into video clips and sound bites and fact-checks and article-length assessments of the candidates’ performances. After Buttigieg’s town hall, a commentator praised his “star turn”; the commentator was writing for CNN.

It’s turtles, all the way down to Super Tuesday. And while Fox and MSNBC have run their own town halls, it is CNN that has most eagerly invested in them. (It has done so, sometimes, at its reputational peril: See the criticism the network received after devoting a town hall to the former Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz, the as-yet-undeclared independent candidate who has seemed to assume his chief qualification for a presidential run to be his status as a billionaire.) That might give the network king- (or, given this field, queen-) making power in a crowded primary; it might simply mean that CNN is adding to the noise of a hectic nominee-selection process. Or it may be that the town halls find a new way to call the culture’s bluff. While the town halls are ostensibly realizations of voters’ hunger for more substantive conversations with candidates, they can also double as showcases for the opposite: sound bites. Gaffes. Memes. Viral moments. The fireworks of the presidential debates, without presidents or debates.

“This is just a theory,” the MSNBC anchor Nicolle Wallace put it, leading a panel discussing Buttigieg’s CNN town-hall performance, “but I think as many people are watching and waiting for these moments … as are watching the polls.” It’s a good theory. And it helps to explain why, on Monday morning, CNN repeatedly cut away from its news coverage to show an empty stage in Manchester, New Hampshire: a set lit dramatically in red and blue, devoid as yet of actors or audience—an embedded advertisement for CNN that doubled, if you squinted in just the right way, as an ad for democracy.



Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers will be discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts in installments.

David Sims: I don’t know where to begin with this one, so I suppose I’ll start with the last person I’ve ever wanted to talk about on Game of Thrones: Euron Greyjoy. For three seasons now, I’ve had to suffer through this goth pirate fool barging into scene after scene to inexplicably tie up some loose narrative thread that David Benioff and D. B. Weiss left dangling. He tossed his brother Balon off a bridge, built a fleet of a thousand ships in an instant, obliterated the entire Dornish royal family, and now has somehow managed to kill one of the show’s two remaining dragons in his continued campaign to impress Cersei Lannister. Morons online complained about Arya’s combat skills last week? Euron’s the one who keeps punching above his weight.

The continued existence of this character—utterly one-dimensional, introduced late in the game, whose only seeming purpose is to smash things up—really exemplifies the issues I’ve had with Thrones as it has moved beyond George R. R. Martin’s source material and tried to wrap things up as neatly as possible. In the first half of “The Last of the Starks,” it seemed viewers were in for another episode of conversation and resolving long-simmering romances, as Daenerys and Jon’s forces recovered from the big battle the night before. But then a bunch of things just happened, essentially out of nowhere—happened so quickly that it was hard to ponder their relative plausibility (yes, even a show this fantastic needs to feel plausible once in a while). By the end of the episode, the story was in the right plotting spot, previewing a big showdown between Cersei and Daenerys. But it got there by having irrelevant nincompoops like Euron magically crash through everything.

Simply put, he shouldn’t be able to bring a dragon down, certainly not by somehow sneaking up with a fleet of boats in the open ocean and shooting … a bunch of big arrows into the sky. Maester Qyburn’s concept of “how about a crossbow, but bigger” was silly enough when he constructed one last season, but apparently in just a few weeks he’s been able to cajole the starving citizens of King’s Landing into building dozens of them and mounting them to every battlement and ship in sight. It’s not that I object to the fallibility of dragons. But the only reason they’re dying off now is that the show is nearly over, and Benioff and Weiss know it’ll jolt the audience into thinking things have gotten real serious. Euron just isn’t scary enough to kill a dragon.

Cersei, atop the walls of King’s Landing, is a little more frightening, but she’s not much more than a boogeyman at this point, an obstacle for Daenerys, Jon, and everyone else to argue over. Far scarier was how in “The Last of the Starks” each cast member was behaving so wildly out of character. Jon, nobly honest to the last, couldn’t help but tell everyone within earshot about his Targaryen heritage. Brienne, after one intimate night with Jaime, became a blubbering fool, begging him not to go off to battle when she’d usually be the first one leading the charge. Sansa pondered aloud that maybe her time being abused by Ramsay Bolton and Littlefinger was character-building. Tyrion, a supposed grand master of strategy, has been reduced to shaking his head with frustration as Varys openly ponders treason in front of him.

Worst of all, of course, is Daenerys, who has now lost her two dearest allies (Jorah and, sigh, Missandei) and is starting to lean very heavily on the Mad King’s favorite “burn it all down” strategy going forward. Even before she started talking about annihilating everyone at King’s Landing, the Mother of Dragon (singular) was displaying the same shoot first, ask questions later tactics she favored in eastern cities like Meereen. Gendry made some nice weapons for the battle and was Robert Baratheon’s son? Why not put him in charge of Storm’s End, a castle he’s never visited and a job he’s probably wildly ill-suited for? Daenerys never met a problem she couldn’t solve in a second, but that was how things went so bad in Slaver’s Bay, and her approach to Westeros has been similarly painful.

No wonder Varys is speaking up for the smallfolk and casting his eyes toward the stoic, if pliable, Jon Snow as a potential alternative. Jon’s the only person left on Game of Thrones who hasn’t become an outright caricature as everything descends into chaos. No, he’s as dull as ever, puzzling over every decision by squinting into the middle distance, perhaps in search of the next absurd deus ex machina on the horizon. I don’t know what else there is to look out for at this point. Spencer and Shirley, are you as despairing as I am, as the Seven Kingdoms’ fate hangs in the balance?

Spencer Kornhaber: I do think it’s too bad that while Game of Thrones used to be admired for portraying a fantasy universe you could believe was real, now it’s a show in which a fleet of boats can ambush a flying dragon. But despite all of the logical head-smack moments you laid out, David, I’m not brimming with complaints. The episode recaptured some classic Thrones qualities, really. With the tedious army of the dead turned to powder, the show can, in its final run, get back to what once made it great: very tense feasts.

Truly, the wake at Winterfell was nearly as nerve-racking to watch as the battle it commemorated. Partly that was simply due to the memory of previous Thrones dinner-party disasters, including the Red Wedding and that one time Cersei quizzed 13-year-old Sansa Stark about menstruation. But David Nutter’s directorial choices (oddly long shots of wine glugging and an eerie lack of music) as well as where exactly is this going? scenarios (drinking games, Tormund speeches, Dany revealing not only Gendry’s parentage but also that she knew who he was at all) amped the unease. Though no great calamity erupted, the tone had been set for the rest of the episode. A betrayal was coming, somehow, somewhere.

This implication made it so that even the repetitive scenes of characters tracing and retracing their dilemmas—is Dany a good leader? What of Jon’s claim?—had a certain scary spark. Emotionally, characters were raw and jangled, and we saw some surprising turns: the cold Brienne sobbing, the proud Dany begging, the lunkish Jon managing to seem legitimately inspiring. These aren’t behaviors we’ve come to expect from these characters, but they’ve arrived in an unexpected place, with the realm’s great existential threat replaced by smaller, more human, concerns. Brienne, for example, never in her life had an opportunity for love. She’s been on a deeply transformational journey with Jaime. For him to walk out just after she’s let her guard down really is something to ugly-cry about.

Emilia Clarke, too, did some of her better work when conveying Dany’s desperation that Jon not share the secret of his birthright. She’s 100 percent right: If Jon really doesn’t want to pursue the throne, he needs to shut up. To think otherwise is almost too know-nothing in nature even for Jon Snow. The show is over-insisting, one more time, on the fatal flaw of the Starks’ devotion to honesty. But Sansa, to her credit, does not appear to possess that flaw anymore. Jon swore her to secrecy, and within a few scenes she was tattling to Tyrion, which then meant the info found its way to Varys, at which point it’s basically on Westeros’s version of Twitter.

Watching the gossip spread is as fun as it is ominous. Varys and Tyrion have been sidelined all season, but now that intrigue is back as the main event, they’re essentially holding a talk show within Game of Thrones. But are they as savvy puppet masters as they once seemed to be? Tyrion demonstrated a strange amount of idealism: He didn’t only insist on Dany’s goodness; he also seemed to believe (yet again) that he might convince Cersei to stand down (a delusion that Jaime, inexplicably, appears to share). Meanwhile, Varys, admirably enough, sounded like an Enlightenment philosopher as he talked about saving lives in a world that treats common folks as expendable. He says he’ll pay any price to help the realm and that’s why he’s considering turning on Dany. Funnily enough, though, Dany says she’ll pay any price for much the same goal: ending tyranny. Varys is accusing her of delusions of grandeur, but is he suffering from the same?

Given all the sabotage talk, one underlying twist of the episode was that a Red Wedding–type situation didn’t unfold. Instead, there were two brutal deaths caused by the dirty tricks of Cersei Lannister at war. Yes, the fact that the dragons could be caught flat-winged by Euron defies all sense. (And this is a silly question at this point, I know, but couldn’t Bran have dropped the tiniest hint about those crossbows?) But the shish-kebabbing itself made for striking viewing. The music and cinematography treated the first ballista bolt like the characters did—slow to react, and then suddenly agitated. Rhaegal swirled down like a careening TIE fighter and then splashed into the sea, making him the second of Dany’s fire-breathers to meet a watery grave.

Later, the execution of Missandei was wrenching to watch, but her final snarl of “Dracarys” did give the character a well-earned last flash of dignity. Moreover, this development is in line with what’s long been clear about Cersei Lannister’s form of cunning: doing the cruelest possible thing at all times. In this case, she’s baiting her rival into acting out of emotion rather than logic, which is something Dany already has a problematic tendency to do. So when Tyrion joked that Cersei might solve all of their coalition’s problems by killing them, it wasn’t so easy to laugh off. After all, he was right about his improbable prediction before the Battle of Winterfell: “I think we might live.” Shirley, on which side of the King’s Landing walls are you placing your bets?

Shirley Li: Count me in as one of the smallfolk racing into the Red Keep for protection. I know I’m headed for fire and blood, but the lion and her kraken at least seem to know what they’re doing—unlike this episode. I’m afraid I wasn’t impressed by “The Last of the Starks.” If it were a character, it’d be Gendry: It got down on its knees, drunkenly updated me on its latest victory, then tried to make me buy into the fact that moving on after fighting a battle against actual ice zombies is fairly easy to do. What you call “surprising turns,” Spencer, I call “nonsensical storytelling.” An existential event may have made Brienne, Sansa, and Jaime more prone to emotions and booze-fueled confessions, but completely changing their characters and their characters’ arcs strained credulity. I’m going to need that scene between Sansa and the Hound rewritten stat.

The thing is, I was ready to accept whatever this episode proposed. Last week’s “The Long Night” proved so disappointing on so many fronts—the confusing direction, the heavy plot armor, the messy narrative—that I couldn’t be more primed to welcome back the political intrigue. Spencer, you pointed out two weeks ago that the show had stopped giving Varys lines because it had put its squabbles over the Iron Throne on ice. Well, “The Last of the Starks” gave him plenty of dialogue tonight.

He just didn’t have much to talk about. To borrow a phrase from that other pop-culture phenomenon in the zeitgeist: We’re in the show’s endgame now, and the endgame is over whether Daenerys is fit to rule. But the show’s pivot to arguing against her is jarring; it’s always been so pro-Dany, with at least three “Dracarys”-level scenes of badassery for every Meereen-based blunder.

So as much as I have always loved these talky scenes between Tyrion and Varys—remember the Spider’s origin story?—the political chatter left me colder than that Craster baby the Night King once took to the Lands of Always Winter. (Yes, I’m still bitter we’re not going to delve into White Walker mythology anymore.) There’s not that much left to say about the dragon queen. She’s worked her entire life to go home, she believes she’s destined for the Iron Throne, and she’ll do anything to get there. We know her mind-set. We know how she came to be. And we know exactly what she’s thinking when Missandei dies.

Which, ugh, Missandei’s death. I’m not terribly bothered by how much the show has left realism behind—fine, the people of King’s Landing can construct Maester Qyburn’s giant scorpions, and fine, Bronn can just wander into Winterfell unnoticed—but when it comes to deaths, well, Thrones deaths are supposed to matter beyond inspiring emotion. The show’s most memorable kills have shed light on the world, subverted expectations, and deepened the story it’s trying to tell: When Ned lost his head, it proved that being good gets you nowhere in Westeros. When the Red Wedding happened, it demonstrated the folly of going back on an oath—and the dangers of choosing love. When Oberyn got his face squished in by the Mountain, it underlined the fact that there are no heroes in this universe and drove Tyrion to his most helpless point in the series.

Missandei’s death, though? She’s flesh-and-bone fodder, essentially, to make the war just a little more personal for Daenerys. The next episode will probably see Grey Worm, now the last remaining character of color with actual speaking lines, charge into battle looking even angrier than he did when he donned his helmet at Winterfell. There might even be a Daenerys speech about doing what she’s about to do for her best girlfriend.

Then again, many of the most recent deaths have felt pointless. Some characters, like Lyanna Mormont, certainly went out in style, but most of the departed perished right after they tidily finished their arc: Jorah served his queen and returned to the North; Theon received Bran’s forgiveness; Melisandre’s prayers to the Lord of Light were answered. With two episodes left, I guess that’s what I’m looking forward to in the coming battle between the queens: the potential for a death that will make me actually shed a tear.



When Deadwood abruptly ended its television run in 2006 after three seasons, well short of what its creator, David Milch, had initially planned, the reasons for its untimely demise were never fully explained. Why did a network renowned for its critically acclaimed output pull the plug on a show that some argue is the greatest in the medium’s history? Over the years, that mystery has become part of the show’s lore. It made a sort of sense that a story about the grand American experiment, where democracy and commerce sprang up on stolen frontier land amid violence and chaos, ended with the main character, Al Swearengen, mopping a pool of blood on his floor and wondering what would come next.

Thirteen years later, a conclusion has finally arrived in the form of Deadwood: The Movie, a feature-length HBO film written by Milch and directed by the series regular Daniel Minahan, starring almost the entire vast ensemble of the original show (minus deceased characters and actors). It’s a perfect, long-delayed swan song that offers satisfying endings for almost every member of the cast while still managing to tell a story that stands on its own: an examination of how American civilization formed a thin veneer over the ruthlessness that helped create it. As such, Deadwood: The Movie feels like an elegy for the “golden age of TV,” the creatively fertile period in the early aughts when television was finally seriously considered an art form.

That exciting time, when networks including HBO, FX, and AMC debuted shows such as The Wire, The Shield, Mad Men, and Breaking Bad, has given way to the fire hose of “peak TV,” as streaming networks flood the zone with content and their broadcast rivals struggle to keep up. In this new universe of entertainment—where ratings matter less and less and any brand name, no matter how niche, is of value—it was almost inevitable that Deadwood might one day return to finish what it had started. This new film, however, does more than just reboot the series for name recognition alone. There’s a particularly tragic tinge to the circumstances of the movie: Milch recently revealed he was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease, making the entire affair feel particularly elegiac. Even so, this script is among the greatest things he’s ever produced.

Deadwood revolves around the real frontier town of the same name, established on stolen Lakota Sioux lands in 1876 and annexed into the Dakota Territory soon after. A gold-rush town, the real Deadwood was initially populated with iniquitous saloon keepers like Swearengen (played in the show by Ian McShane), hard-bitten prospectors looking to stake out early claims, and faded figures of the Old West such as Wild Bill Hickok (Keith Carradine) and Calamity Jane (Robin Weigert). The show tracked the slow progress toward civic sophistication that followed the conquering force of these “pioneers” as the camp built a health-care system of sorts, held hugely corrupt elections, and started clinging to leaders such as Seth Bullock (Timothy Olyphant), a former lawman who is quickly pressed back into service on arriving in Deadwood.

Deadwood: The Movie is set in 1889, a decade after the final season, as the town prepares for South Dakota to become a state. The narrative threads between the most recent episode, “Tell Him Something Pretty,” and Deadwood: The Movie are surprisingly taut—Milch is looking to cap off not only the general history of Deadwood, but also the specific clashes between its key residents that were left simmering after the last season. The characters are largely unchanged (except for the gray in their hair and the wrinkles on their faces), but the town’s sets have been given a suitably fancy sheen, as the muddy camp of the original show has transformed into a genuine boomtown with power lines dotting the landscape.

The engine of all that commerce is George Hearst (Gerald McRaney), the villain of the show’s third season, now back in town as a U.S. senator who has never forgotten the slights he suffered in years past. If Deadwood was a show about the way American democracy organizes itself around raw capital—in this case, gold mining—Hearst (named for a real-life figure) was that system personified, a ruthless businessman with no interest in anything but the accumulation of wealth and power. Even wrapped in Congress’s veil of civility, Hearst remains a nightmare of a man, someone whom Deadwood’s disparate denizens can rally against as he returns to settle old scores.

If you haven’t seen any of Deadwood’s three seasons, the film will likely be an unfulfilling experience. It does its best to fill in some crucial plot details with a few flashbacks, but these scenes exist less for newcomers than for fans who might not remember every detail from years past. Deadwood has long been one of my favorite shows, but I hadn’t fully rewatched the series since it ended; when the movie was announced, I took it as an opportunity to dive back in, an experience I highly recommend. If it’s been a while since you’ve seen the show and you’re looking for a refresher, “Tell Him Something Pretty,” the aforementioned third-season finale, is the episode to watch, given that the movie revolves around many of its dangling threads.

The real joy of Deadwood: The Movie is watching great actors such as Weigert, Olyphant, McShane, and so many more sink their teeth into these evocative characters one last time. Milch gives every character a chance to shine without structuring the story in a way that feels like a greatest-hits anthology. That connectedness is something Deadwood benefits from—almost all the action is set on a single thoroughfare, where all 30 members of the ensemble can crane their necks down from their balconies or out their windows to take in whatever action might be unfolding. Deadwood has always been a show about the ecosystem of a frontier society and the way it reflects the brutal but unique hodgepodge that is this country. By giving everyone involved one last moment in the limelight, the movie version encapsulates that concept perfectly.



The approach to Joy Division is forbidding. This band comes sealed in a myth of monumental severity, outside rock and roll to some degree, its achievement arrested at the point of maximum force by the suicide, in 1980, of singer Ian Curtis. Reading the fragmentary testimonies in This Searing Light, The Sun and Everything Else, Jon Savage’s oral history of Joy Division, I was put in mind of “Cold Dark Matter,” the 1991 installation by the British artist Cornelia Parker. With the British army, Parker arranged for a garden shed to be blown up. Having meticulously recorded the explosion, she then collected and assembled the debris in a facsimile of the shed at the moment of disintegration, every shard and smithereen now fixed in space, flying but stopped, with a core of white light at the center.

The glare and the bloom of illumination at the core of Joy Division are a mystery. Not the mystery of why Curtis took his own life—the immediate subjective reasons for that become miserably clear as you read this book. But the mystery of how four working-class Northern English boys, mostly interested, as a unit, in beer and ciggies, and without ever really talking about it, contrived to turn themselves into a portal for some of the most alien and beautiful information ever to be broadcast through the medium of a rock-and-roll band.

Local conditions had something to do with it. Manchester was their city, the late ’70s was their time, and punk rock was their precipitator. Postindustrial vacancies, barbs of energy. They were in the tiny, existentially provoked audience when the Sex Pistols played the Manchester Free Trade Hall in 1976. “There were so few people there that you just talked to them,” says the bassist Peter Hook in This Searing Light, “because if something awful had happened, you’d talk to the person next to you, wouldn’t you? If you watched a crash, you’d say ‘Oh Jesus, that was bad, wasn’t it?’” The band was formed that night.

Post-punk: what a great term. We’re all post-punk. Punk happened, and then—at some point—we did. For bands in the era of Joy Division, it meant music that sounded like ideas. Tony Wilson, trickster-broadcaster and high theorist of the Manchester Geist, signed them to his new label, Factory. “The degraded city was part of Joy Division’s life,” said Wilson. “The idea of the city is a theme that runs through this whole thing, Manchester being the archetypal modern city.” Martin Hannett became their producer—dimensional slippage was his fixation, the little blips and space-smears and echoes of otherness with which he would open up the Joy Division sound.

And as musicians, they were, each of them, unique: Peter Hook’s aggressively melodic, high-fretted bass playing, the instrument itself slung somewhere around his knees, was like a hum or lamentation inside the skull; the guitarist Bernard Sumner combined his own cold architecture with the Eastern snarl of the Stooges’ Ron Asheton; Stephen Morris played the drums as if setting (and then frowningly solving) a series of bitter mechanical problems; and the groggy, cavernous baritone of Ian Curtis, singing in the accent of an evacuated Jim Morrison, marked out a ritual space in the middle of the music.

So along the horizontal axis, so to speak, these were the coordinates: the people and the circumstances, the run of time. Ian Curtis had a wife and a job and a baby daughter and a little house in Macclesfield, outside Manchester. He liked knocking around with his mates and playing in his band. But he also lived on the vertical axis: timelessness, separation. He had visions. “Someone take these dreams away / That point me to another day,” he sang in “Dead Souls.” Were they petit mal episodes, precursors to the epilepsy that would blight his last couple of years? They had their own imagery and atmosphere: Rome, Egypt, the Third Reich. Curtis would space out into arenas of fascist grandeur, smelling blood: “I traveled far and wide through many different times, / What did you see there?/ I saw the saints with their toys, / What did you see there? / I saw all knowledge destroyed.”

Things converged, or radiated outward in a web—it was impossible to tell which. At any rate, the momentum was irresistible, to the band and those around it. Rock and roll was left far behind as 1979’s Unknown Pleasures—still recognizable, just, as a rock album—was vacuumed up into the inhuman latitudes of 1980’s Closer. Music-press photographers, sent to cover the mumbling, disparate Joy Division, would be startled to find an unaccommodated but entirely coherent band aesthetic beaming through their lenses. Curtis, who in performance would dance like someone trying to give himself a fit, to induce an electrical event, staring fixedly while whipping up a vortex of trapped panic with his body, had his first grand mal seizure; his marriage began to break down; and as the music of Joy Division towered ever more remotely, his lyrics became excruciatingly personal. “This is the crisis I knew had to come / Destroying the balance I’ve kept.” The band’s reputation was growing. Curtis was channeling Kafka, Burroughs, Munch, the 20th century, himself. Personal-impersonal, human-inhuman. And yet somehow it was all hidden, hooded, none of it discussed or made explicit. This perhaps is the answer, or an answer, to the mystery: that gruffness, Englishness, willed monotony, beer, understatement, and a kind of climatic depression all provided the perfect cover for the growth of an artistic monstrosity.

Savage’s book is excellent. With Joy Division, eventually, words peter out or fritter away into uselessness. Which doesn’t mean we shouldn’t keep trying, of course, but reading the dazzled witnesses in This Searing Light, and the undone experts, and the bandmates fumbling with the abrupt immensity of their singer’s absence, everything partial, broken, everything occluded in some respect, the oral-history method makes more and more sense. Where would this band have gone had Curtis lived? Joy Division, the entity, had dance music in it, an electronic future, and also great depths of romanticism awaiting discovery: The posthumous single “Atmosphere” is bombastically gorgeous. In the mid-’90s, when Ryan Giggs was tearing down the left wing for Manchester United, black hair flying behind a pale face and billowy red shirt flattened against his ribs, United fans would serenade him to the tune of Joy Division’s biggest hit, “Love Will Tear Us Apart”: “Giggs, Giggs will tear you apart a-gain.” A most unexpected fate for this saddest and fiercest of bands: folk music.



Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers have been discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts on the series finale in installments.

David Sims: Let me start this review by listing a few of Brandon Stark’s qualifications to hold the Iron Throne (or whatever throne takes its place) of Westeros. One, as the eldest male Stark, he’s got the lordly bloodline to appease the country’s more tradition-obsessed members. Two, he’s got the temperament—ever since he assumed the mantle of the three-eyed raven, I haven’t seen him get remotely upset about anything, so no Mad King potential there. Three, he can see across the sea of time and has the power to mentally experience every memory anyone in Westeros has ever had, which is definitely a helpful skill set going forward. Honestly, someone should have thought to crown Bran earlier.

The sudden decision by Tyrion and company to name Bran the new Lord of the Seven—sorry, Six—Kingdoms might have prompted a fair bit of whiplash for viewers. In all the warring between Daenerys, Jon, and Cersei, Bran was mostly overlooked as a contender, having become a living Wikipedia database and losing his personality in the process. The move to crown him was arrived at with the same kind of alarming speed that accompanied just about every big plot twist this season. The difference for me was that, by the time of the finale (titled “The Iron Throne”), I was less worried about plausibility and more just wondering how everything would end up. After a largely disappointing lead-up, I was at least satisfied by where the pieces fell.

To summarize: Daenerys the conqueror quickly indicates that she’s not done with warfare and promises to “liberate” people from tyranny all over the world. After a long chat with a depressed and imprisoned Tyrion, Jon realizes he’s not into that plan and stabs his queen (and aunt and former lover) in front of the Iron Throne, which Drogon then impressively melts before taking his mother’s body to parts unknown. In the wake of that carnage, Westeros’s surviving leaders gather to sift through the mess and appoint Bran king. “Bran the Broken” then names Tyrion as his hand, sends Jon to the Wall as punishment for killing Dany, and allows Sansa to run the North as an independent kingdom. Arya, eager to do something new, hops on a boat and sails west into uncharted waters.

After the misery of “The Bells,” it was a finale undeniably steeped in fan service, giving audience favorites such as Brienne, Davos, Sam, and Bronn seats on the new small council and doing away with literally every bloodthirsty or unstable member of the cast. Seriously—anyone important in Westeros who ever spent a minute scheming about anything is dead, except for Tyrion, who professed himself thoroughly cowed by the whole war and promised to atone for his sins going forward. Jon even got to pet his dire wolf Ghost, finally, before he journeyed with Tormund and the other Free Folk beyond the Wall to make a new life.

As a book reader who hopes that George R. R. Martin will one day finally deliver the ending he’s been working toward all these years, I was reassured. Daenerys’s flip to madness was utterly unearned by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, but in the end, her dream was achieved, and the wheel was ostensibly broken, partly by the bloodshed she wrought in King’s Landing. Sick of the wars of succession that consumed the nation for years, the lords of Westeros will now pick rulers by committee, a system that sounds lovely in theory and that is incredibly fraught in reality. So much of Bran’s rule will probably be plagued with its own issues, but that would be a story for another series, not the Song of Ice and Fire (a title that was helpfully embossed on a large volume for Tyrion to read).

As a fan of the TV show, I felt battered into submission. This season has been the same story over and over again: a lot of tin-eared writing trying to justify some of the most drastic story developments imaginable, as quickly as possible. As usual, the actors did their best with what was on the page; Emilia Clarke and Peter Dinklage, long the two standouts of the show’s ensemble, wrestled mighty performances from unwieldy monologues, with Clarke trying to justify Daenerys’s belief in the burning of the city, and Tyrion finally investing his support in Bran, a living archive of Westeros’s history. Pause and think about the logic of it all for a second, and it’ll collapse under scrutiny. But time and time again in recent years, Benioff and Weiss have opted for grand cinematic gestures over granular world building, and Drogon burning the Throne to sludge was their last big mic drop. Spencer, Lenika, was that enough to win your fealty?

Spencer Kornhaber: The penultimate episode of Game of Thrones gave us one of the most dramatic reversals in TV history, with the once-good queen going genocidal. The finale gave us yet another historic reversal, in that this drama turned into a sitcom. Not a slick HBO sitcom either, but a cheapo network affair, or maybe even a webisode of outtakes from one. Tonally odd, logically strained, and emotionally thin, “The Iron Throne” felt like the first draft of a finale.

When Dany torched King’s Landing last week, viewers were incensed, but I’d argue it was less because the onetime hero went bad than because it wasn’t clear why she did. Long-simmering madness? Sudden emotional break? Tough-minded strategy? A desire to implement an innovative new city grid? The answer to this would seem to help answer some of the show’s most fundamental inquiries about might and right, little people and greater goods, noble nature and cruel nurture. Thrones has been shaky quality-wise for some time now, but surely the show would be competent enough to hinge the finale around the mystery of Dany’s decision.

Nope. The first parts of the episode loaded up on ponderous scenes of the characters whose horror at the razing of King’s Landing had been made plenty clear during the course of the razing. Tyrion speculated a bit to Jon about what had happened—Dany truly believed she was out to save the world and could thus justify any means on the way to messianic ends—but it was, truly, just speculation. When Jon and Dany met up, he raged at her, and she gave some tyrannical talk knowing what “the good world” would need (shades of “I alone can fix it,” no?). But whether her total firebombing was premeditated, tactical, or a tantrum remained unclear. Whether she was always this deranged or just now became so determines what story Thrones was telling all along, and Benioff and Weiss have left it to be argued about in Facebook threads.

The Dany speechifying that we did get in this episode was, notably, not in the common tongue. Though conducted in Dothraki and Valaryian and not German, her victory rally was clearly meant to evoke Hitler in Triumph of the Will. It also visually recalled the white-cloaked Saruman rallying the orc armies in The Two Towers, another queasy echo. People talk about George R. R. Martin “subverting” Tolkien, but on the diciest element of Lord of the Rings—the capacity for it to be seen as a racist allegory, with Sauron’s horde of exotic brutes bearing down on an idyllic kingdom—this episode simply took the subtext and made it text. With the Northmen sitting out the march, the Dothraki and Unsullied were cast as bloodthirsty others eager to massacre a continent. Given all the baggage around Dany’s white-savior narrative from the start, going so heavy on the hooting and barking was a telling sign of the clumsiness to come.

Jon’s kiss-and-kill with Dany led to the one moment of sharp emotion—terror—I felt over the course of this bizarrely inert episode. That emotion came not from the assassination itself but rather from the suspense about what Drogon would do about it. For the dragon to roast the slayer of his mother would have been a fittingly awful but logical turn. Instead, Drogon turned his geyser toward the Iron Throne. Whether Aegon’s thousand swords were just a coincidental casualty of a dragon’s mourning or, rather, the chosen target of a beast with a higher purpose—R’hllor take the wheel?—is another key thing fans will be left to argue about.

Then came the epilogue, a parade of oofs. David, you say you were satisfied by where this finale moved all its game pieces, and if I step back … well, no, I’m not satisfied with Arya showing a sudden new interest in seafaring, but maybe I can be argued into it. What I can’t budge on is the parody-worthy crumminess of the execution. Take the council that decides the fate of Westeros. It appears that various lords gathered to force a confrontation with the Unsullied about the prisoners Tyrion and Jon Snow and the status of King’s Landing. But then one of those prisoners suggests they pick a ruler for the realm. They then … do just that. Right there and then. Huh?

It really undoes much of what we’ve learned about Westeros as a land of ruthlessly competing interests to see a group of far-flung factions unanimously agree to give the crown to the literal opposite of a “people person.” Yes, the council is dominated by protagonist types whom we know to be good-hearted and tired of war. But surely someone—hello, new prince of Dorne! What’s up, noted screamer Robin Arryn?—would make more of a case for another candidate than poor Edmure Tully did. Rather than hashing out the intrigue of it all as Thrones once would have done, we got Sam bringing up the concept of democracy and getting laughed down. The joke relied on the worst kind of anachronistic humor—breaking the fourth wall that had been so carefully mortared up over all these years—and much of the rest of the episode would coast on similarly wack moments.

It’s “nice” to see beloved characters ride off into various sunsets, but I balk at the notion that these endings even count as fan service. What true fan of Thrones thinks this show existed to deliver wish fulfillment? I’m not saying I wanted everyone to get gobbled up by a rogue zombie flank in the show’s final moments. Yet rather than honoring the complication and tough rules that made Thrones’ world so strangely lovable, Benioff and Weiss waved a wand and zapped away tension and consequence. You see this, for example, in the baffling arc of Bronn over the course of Season 8. What was the point of having him nearly kill Jaime and Tyrion if he was going to just be yada-yadaed onto the small council at the end?

One thing I can’t complain about: the hint that clean water will soon be coming to Westeros. Hopefully, someone will use it to give Ghost a bath. As the doggy and his dad rode north of the Wall with a band of men, women, and children, the message seemed to be that where death once ruled, life could begin. Winter Is Leaving. It’d seem like a hopeful takeaway for our own world, except that it’s not clear, even now, exactly how and why the realm of Thrones arrived at this happy outcome. Lenika, do you have answers?

Lenika Cruz: Do I have answers? Who do you think I am—Bran the Broken? Before I get into this episode, I need to acknowledge how unfortunate it is that Tyrion decided to give the new ruler of the Six Kingdoms a name as horrifyingly ableist as Bran the Broken. You could, of course, argue that the moniker was intended as a reclamation of a slur or as a poignant callback to Season 1’s “Cripples, Bastards, and Broken Things,” when Tyrion and Bran first bonded. But given the “parade of oofs” this finale provided—including the troubling optics of Dany’s big speech—it’s hard to make excuses for the show.

Now that we’ve gotten our “the real Game of Thrones/Iron Throne/Song of Ice and Fire was the friends we made along the way” jokes out of our system, where to begin? I basically agree with Spencer’s scorched-earth take on “The Iron Throne.” I was already expecting the finale to be a disappointment, but I didn’t foresee the tonal and narrative whiplash that I experienced here. At one point during the small-council meeting, my mind stopped processing the dialogue because I was in such disbelief about the several enormous things that had happened within the span of 15 minutes: Jon stabs Dany. Instead of roasting Jon, Drogon symbolically melts the Iron Throne and carries the limp body of his mother off in his talons. A conclave of lords and ladies of Westeros is convened, and Tyrion is brought before them in chains, and they know Dany was murdered, and Tyrion argues for an entirely new system of government while being held prisoner by the Master of War of the person he just conspired to assassinate. Excuse me? (The way that Grey Worm huffed, “Make your choice, then,” at those assembled reminded me of an impatient father waiting for his children to pick which ice-cream flavor they want.)

David, Spencer—of the three of us, I’ve been the most stubborn about thinking this final season is bad and holding that badness against the show. I don’t fault viewers who’ve become inured to the shoddy writing and plotting, and who’ve been grading each episode on a curve as a result. But I personally haven’t been able to get into a mind-set where I can watch an episode and enjoy it for everything except stuff like pacing issues, rushed character development, tonal dissonance, the lack of attention to detail, unexplained reversals, and weak dialogue. All of those problems absolutely make the show less enjoyable for me, and I haven’t learned to compartmentalize them—even though I know how hard it must have been for Benioff and Weiss to piece together an airtight final act solely from Martin’s book notes.

You mention, David, your feelings about the finale as a show watcher versus as a book reader. As someone who never finished all the books, I can’t blame you for feeling optimistic about how the story generally ends up. Much like with last week’s episode, I can actually see myself being on board with many of the plot points in the finale—if only they had been built up to properly and given the right sort of connective tissue. For all the episode’s earnest exhortations about the power of stories, “The Iron Throne” itself didn’t do much to model that value.

For example, I can’t be the only one who was let down, and at a loss for a larger takeaway, after seeing a high-stakes contest between two ambitious female rulers devolve after both became unhinged and got themselves killed. After all the intense discussion about gender politics that Thrones has spurred, and after seeing characters such as Sansa, Brienne, Cersei, Daenerys, and Yara reshape the patriarchal structures of Westeros, we’ve ended up with a male ruler (who once said, “I will never be lord of anything”) installed on the charismatic recommendation of another man and served by a small council composed almost entirely of … men.

Perhaps there’s no deeper meaning to any of this. Or perhaps this state of affairs is a commentary on the frustrating realities of incrementalism. I am, of course, beyond pleased that Sansa Stark has at least become the Queen in the North—a title that she, frankly, deserved from the beginning. But I haven’t forgotten that this show only recently had her articulate the silver lining of being raped and tortured. Nor am I waving away the fact that Brienne spent some of her last moments on-screen writing a fond tribute to a man who betrayed her and all but undid his entire character arc in one swoop. My sense is that the show’s writers didn’t think about Thrones resetting to the rule of men much at all, and that they were instead relishing having a gaggle of former misfits sitting on the small council. See? the show seemed to cry. Change!

At times, Thrones gestured more clearly to the ways in which the story was going a more circular route; this was especially true of the Starks. Jon headed up to Castle Black and became a kind of successor to Mance Rayder—someone leading not because of his last name or bloodline but because of the loyalty he’s earned. Arya’s seafaring didn’t feel out of character to me—it fit with her sense of adventure and reminded me of her voyage across the Narrow Sea to Braavos all those years ago. Sansa became Queen in the North in a scene that recalled the debut of “Dark Sansa” in the Vale, but that felt like a true acknowledgment of how much her character has transformed. I’ll admit, the crosscutting of the scenes showing the Starks finding their own, separate ways forward was beautifully done. It made me wish the episode as a whole had been more cohesive, less rushed, and more emotionally resonant.

Spencer, I think you smartly diagnosed so many of the big-picture problems with the finale—the sitcommy feel, the yada-yadaing of major points, the many attempts at fan service. So rather than elaborate even more, I’ll end this review by saying something sort of obvious: Viewers are perfectly entitled to feel about the ending of Game of Thrones however they want to. After eight seasons, they have earned the right to be as wrathful or blissed-out on this finale as they want; it’s been a long and stressful ride for us all. I’m genuinely happy that there are folks who don’t feel as though the hours and hours they’ve devoted to this show have been wasted. I know there are many others who wish they could say the same thing.



Donald Glover has a lot of tricks up his sleeve. Earlier this week, the Emmy-winning Atlanta creator and musician unveiled a new project at Coachella. Guava Island, the secret film he’d snuck off to Cuba to film with Rihanna and the frequent Atlanta director Hiro Murai last year, debuted Thursday evening at the music festival as a lead-in to Glover’s headlining performance (as his musical alter ego, Childish Gambino). On Saturday, the film began streaming on Amazon, where viewers well outside the funky haze of Coachella can catch it in front of the platform’s paywall until Saturday evening, when it’ll become exclusive to Prime subscribers.

The massive rollout, which was largely kept under wraps prior to this week, is a testament to the influence Glover’s built as a multi-hyphenate entertainer, and as an artistic mind. Jennifer Salke, the head of Amazon Studios, told Vanity Fair she knew she wanted to commit the streaming giant’s funds to the project after watching a four-and-a-half minute sizzle reel. The teaser arrived via a onetime viewing link that expired 30 minutes after Salke received it, but “I would have committed to Donald sight unseen,” she said of the decision. “I knew whatever he wanted to amplify would have relevance and be entertaining. He has that ability to create cultural moments and spread a message that’s interesting.”
Though different in tone, Guava Island does indeed demand the kind of attention that Glover’s previous projects have. It’s a slim production, with a runtime of 54 minutes. But within the short snapshot, Glover and Murai assemble a magnetic cast who are, quite simply, a joy to watch. The film follows Deni Maroon (Glover), a charming and goofy musician with strong anti-capitalist leanings who wants to host a festival for the hardworking people of Guava. As his girlfriend, Kofi Novia, Rihanna is delightfully unimpressed with Deni’s songs and soapbox alike. Letitia Wright of Black Panther plays Yara Love, Kofi’s friend, though she’s not on-screen nearly enough. The three gallivant around a beautifully shot Havana, with bright clothing and even sunnier dispositions.

The film opens with a stunning animated sequence, an immediate indication that Guava Island is an aesthetics-driven production. Murai’s attention to color and contrast is particularly impressive: There are royal purples and bold reds, calming deep blues and sunny yellows. Guava seems alive, even before the film shifts to live-action footage. The animation, narrated by Rihanna’s Kofi, tells the story of how she and Deni met, and how the island came to be governed by a ruthless businessman named Red (Nonso Anozie). The screen crackles with an electrifying vibrance in these scenes; Kofi and Deni’s animated avatars engage in lively banter. When Deni says he will keep playing Kofi music until he writes a song as beautiful as she is, her retort is peak Rihanna: “Fortunately no song is that beautiful.” For fans of the famously nonplussed singer, it’s particularly satisfying to see her (lovingly) dismiss Glover’s character like this.
Inspired by the Brazilian crime film City of God and the Prince musical drama Purple Rain, Guava Island has a somewhat political conflict at its core. Deni is frustrated by Red’s domination of the island’s impoverished workers, and often uses music to express his ire. “What’s wrong with me is that we live in paradise, but none of us have the time or means to actually live here,” he tells one factory co-worker early in the film. Later, when another person speaks about saving up enough money for a bribe to move to America and start his own business, Deni scoffs. “This is America. Guava’s no different than any other country,” he says. “America is a concept. Anywhere where in order to get rich you have to make someone else richer is America.”

The aggressively on-the-nose commentary then leads into an interpolation of Glover’s “This Is America,” the song (and eerily dance-heavy music video) he released last year. The Guava Island rendering is largely about money, and the island workers’ impossible economic position. In this, and in its somewhat anticlimactic ending, the film parallels much of the story behind Bob Marley’s 1976 Smile Jamaica concert. This political commentary, and the final 15 minutes of the film, are thinner than the celebratory moments throughout its run.

Still, Guava Island is a fun warm-weather romp full of charming melodies and breezy interactions. Rihanna and Glover regard each other with curiosity and verve that doesn’t quite land as romantic chemistry, but is clearly driven by mutual affection. The film is buoyed by a supporting cast primarily composed of black actors, a welcome reflection of Cuba’s large Afro-Latino population. (There are, it’s worth noting, some general inconsistencies on the accent front, but that’s a forgivable distraction.)
Glover has been honing his craft as an auteur for years, and Guava Island is a fascinating study in how he applies it to material with less emotional gravitas than his acclaimed Atlanta. But most important, the actor spends a solid chunk of his screen time dancing around an island with Rihanna. It’s hard to argue with that.



Helen Mirren admired her acting. Bob Hope praised her natural comic timing. James Garner thought her the sexiest sort of co-star. She recorded more than 600 songs, made 39 movies, and, for four years in the early 1960s, reigned as the No. 1 box-office star in the world.

And yet Doris Day, who died Monday at 97, was always underrated—the girl next door whose peaches-and-cream good looks, 1,000-watt smile, and sinuous, molten singing voice were so often taken for granted. Her huge commercial power—and the bad management of her third husband, Martin Melcher—meant that she seldom had material worthy of her talents, in records or on film.

But when she did, watch out.

Her performance as the Jazz Age chanteuse Ruth Etting in 1955’s Love Me or Leave Me is as heartbreaking and affecting a piece of acting as was ever committed to celluloid. Her co-star James Cagney praised her as “the epitome of guilelessness” and compared her to Laurette Taylor, the great stage actress and original star of The Glass Menagerie.

In 1994, years after Day’s retirement and near-total withdrawal from the public scene, she released The Love Album, a collection of classic standards she had recorded and shelved 27 years earlier. “We should not underestimate the quality of her voice,” the film historian David Thomson once wrote. “Not only was she a fine singer, technically, but her singing voice had a natural dramatic force that carried her beyond her acting ability.” Her downbeat, slow-tempo take on “Life Is Just a Bowl of Cherries” reflects the hard-won wisdom of a woman whose life was anything but.

Day was born Doris Mary Anne Kappelhoff in Cincinnati in 1922 (until two years ago, when the Associated Press unearthed her birth certificate, she’d apparently believed she was born in 1924) and originally hoped to be a dancer. An automobile accident that shattered her right leg when she was a teenager ended that dream, but soon enough, voice lessons with a local teacher named Grace Raine (who would later train Rosemary Clooney) sparked a new ambition. Within 18 months of the accident, Day landed a singing gig with Barney Rapp’s band and was on her way.

It was in Rapp’s band that she changed her last name to Day and met her first husband, an abusive trombonist named Al Jorden who fathered her only child—a son, Terry—and beat her, starting the day after their wedding. The marriage lasted barely two years, but Day’s career took off, first with the Bob Crosby band, and then with Les Brown’s, where her first megahit, “Sentimental Journey,” became the anthem of returning World War II servicemen in 1945.

Her film career began almost by accident, in 1948. Day’s second marriage (to the saxophonist George Weidler) was breaking up just as Warner Bros. was preparing to make a musical, Romance on the High Seas, starring Betty Hutton. But Hutton found out she was pregnant, and there was a frantic search for a replacement. The songwriter Sammy Cahn immediately thought of Day, who soon got a screen test with the director Michael Curtiz. Curtiz, a Hungarian who was famous for his mangled English, took one look at Day and pronounced, “I sometimes like girl who is not actress. Is less pretend and more heart.”

“Less pretend and more heart” distilled the essence of Day’s art, and soon she was the queen of the Warner lot, launched on a series of musicals and comedies. Her image grew so squeaky-clean that Oscar Levant finally uttered the epigram that clung to her for the rest of her life: “I knew her before she was a virgin.” So entrenched was her immaculate persona that she was the producer Larry Turman’s against-type choice to play Mrs. Robinson in The Graduate. (She turned him down.) In fact, Day was anything but sexless. Her suitors in her early Hollywood days included Ronald Reagan, a onetime co-star, as well as Jack Carson, another co-star.

She also became a gay icon, beginning with her androgynous, buckskinned performance in Calamity Jane (1953), in which she sang “Secret Love,” a ballad of suppressed yearning. The series of coy sex comedies she made in the late ’50s and early ’60s with her close friend, the closeted Rock Hudson, reinforced that status. Her film career lasted precisely 20 years, and there was scarcely a romantic leading man with whom she did not appear: Frank Sinatra, James Stewart, Clark Gable, Kirk Douglas, David Niven, Cary Grant, Rex Harrison, Jack Lemmon.

But in reality, Day’s love life was painful. Her third husband was her agent, Melcher, who adopted her son and became her manager. With ironclad control over all aspects of her career, he invariably subordinated taste to crass commercial appeal. When he died, in 1968, after 17 years of marriage, Day discovered that he and their lawyer not only had squandered her fortune through a series of bad investments, but had also committed her to a television series that she was loath to do. But she did it, gamely adapting to yet another medium with The Doris Day Show, whose theme song was “Que Sera, Sera,” the upbeat ballad she had introduced in Alfred Hitchcock’s The Man Who Knew Too Much. She eventually won a multimillion-dollar judgment against the lawyer.

In 1975, she published Doris Day, Her Own Story, a best-selling, brutally candid as-told-to autobiography with A. E. Hotchner, in which she shared beauty and wellness tips (once a week, she slathered her whole body in Vaseline). But mostly she recounted her tumultuous offstage life—including the long-standing speculation that her son, Terry Melcher, might have been the intended target of Charles Manson and his followers. Melcher had known Manson slightly—he had auditioned Manson for a potential recording deal—and had once lived in the house where Sharon Tate was murdered. By the time of the book’s release, Day was about to begin her retreat from the public eye. Long shy about live performance—despite her start as a band singer—she left Beverly Hills for Carmel Valley, California. There she devoted her life to animal rights and welfare, and to the management of her charming boutique hotel, the Cypress Inn.

In 1985, she starred in Doris Day’s Best Friends, a series about her love of animals on the Christian Broadcasting Network. It was there that her old friend Hudson made his last public appearance, visibly ravaged by the AIDS that would soon kill him. Twenty years later, her Doris Day Animal Foundation helped rescue pets stranded by Hurricane Katrina.

In the end, it was perhaps her ordinariness that was most extraordinary, and the secret of her success. She was in the air her audiences breathed. Like all the most talented artists, she made what she did look easy, whether acting or singing, never letting the work show. Her friend, the character actor Billy De Wolfe, once told her she didn’t look like anyone named Doris Day, but more like “Clara Bixby.” To the end of her life, that’s how she was known to her closest circle. “God knows I’m not one of the awesome beauties, like Elizabeth Taylor, who epitomize the words ‘movie star,’’’ she wrote with perhaps excessive self-deprecation in her memoir. “What I am is the truck driver’s delight. People on the street always call me Doris. That’s just the way I want it. We are family, my audience and I.”

Indeed, she was never a stranger, never a forbidding persona, never “Miss Day.” No wonder, then, that her death feels like a death in the family.



It’s hard to talk about Dr. John without giving in to New Orleans cliché. The Mephistophelian pianist, singer, and songwriter, who died Thursday, at 77, was happy to tempt that indulgence, just like he tempted listeners with so many other vices. There were the Mardi Gras Indian costumes he wore onstage; the checkered past, including an accidental gunshot wound; the hard living; the wry humor.

Just take the opening moments of his first solo record, which came out in 1968. First, a miasmatic swamp-guitar lick. Then the man himself, half singing, half talking huskily: “They call me”—beat—“Dr. John, the Night Tripper. Got my satchel of gris-gris in my hand.”

If this seems a little too redolent of Bourbon Street play-acting for tipsy tourists—Gris-Gris, the name of the album, comes from a voodoo amulet—let the record keep spinning, or streaming. Fifty-one years since its release, it remains shockingly weird. The mix of funk, blues, psychedelia, and Latin and African music prefigured jam bands (only actually greasy, and less meandering) as well as the cross-cultural borrowing common in today’s music. The album’s hit is the last track, “I Walk on Guilded Splinters.” It’s nearly eight minutes long and built on a repeating bass vamp and marginally intelligible lyrics. Yet it’s also irresistibly catchy: Cher released an excellent version of the song, at one-third the length, the following year.





Dr. John was born Mac Rebennack. He spent his nearly eight decades of life gleefully ignoring barriers: between pop music and outré explorations, black and white culture, authenticity and commerciality, tradition and innovation. That this, too, represents something of a New Orleans trope does not make it less true.

New Orleans is a piano town and a place where musical traditions are handed down from generation to generation through personal connections, and young Mac Rebennack was a product of both those customs. He learned to play at the feet of Professor Longhair, perhaps the greatest of the Crescent City keyboard titans. (Rebennack also played guitar, but the bullet wound to a finger, sustained when he tried to break up a fight, forced him to focus on piano and organ.)

Rebennack headed to Los Angeles in the mid-1960s, following a stint in prison for heroin possession. (He struggled with the addiction for years, making his advanced age seem like a miracle—or perhaps, more fittingly, a testament to the mystical power of voodoo.) In California, he became an accomplished session musician, playing with Phil Spector’s Wrecking Crew and backing artists from Sonny and Cher to Frank Zappa. Even after adopting his nom de piano and launching a solo career, he continued to be an in-demand sideman, including playing on The Rolling Stones’ Exile on Main Street.





But Gris-Gris made him a powerful musical force in his own right. Then, after disagreements with his managers hobbled The Sun, Moon, and Herbs, which was to be a sprawling fourth album, Dr. John was persuaded to make a record of New Orleans classics. The concept isn’t inspiring: It sounds like the sort of thing pushed on an unwilling artist by a greedy executive, and likely to produce a dull, dutiful reading of standards. Instead, Dr. John’s Gumbo includes tip-top renditions of “Iko Iko,” Professor Longhair’s “Tipitina,” and the like. It’s reverent without being fawning or rote.

Dr. John wasn’t afraid of this vein of commercialism, and in fact said he’d made his best money from writing jingles for brands like Oreo and Scott, the tissue company. But he never got less weird. In The Last Waltz, Martin Scorsese’s film of The Band’s 1976 farewell concert, Dr. John is one of the most memorable guests. Wearing oversize sunglasses, a beret, and a narcotized leer, he delivers a performance of “Such a Night” that somehow manages to out-swamp Muddy Waters, out-lech Ronnie Hawkins, and out-mystic Van Morrison, all of whom also appeared at the concert.





Despite his personal struggles, or perhaps because of them, Dr. John continued to record consistently throughout his career. He continued to make tribute records—a 2000 Duke Ellington homage is another idea that sounds dubious in theory yet won plaudits in practice—but also continued to search for new ingredients for his gumbo. His 2012 Locked Down, which is by turns menacing and uplifting, is steeped in Ethiopian jazz and Nigerian Afrobeat. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2011.

This decade has not been kind to New Orleans piano players. Dr. John completes a troika of losses, starting with Allen Toussaint in 2015 and continuing through to Fats Domino in 2017, a combined 240-some years of experience. Musicians of this caliber are said to have achieved metaphorical immortality. But with his voodoo trappings and mischievous mien, it’s easy to imagine Dr. John is still out there, tripping through the night.



T

he night that Elizabeth Acevedo’s debut novel won the 2018 National Book Award for Young People’s Literature, the author celebrated by retreating into a familiar comfort. She headed straight uptown to her mother’s apartment that crisp November evening and treated herself to the aromatic meal that had been a hallmark of her New York City upbringing. “It was like midnight at that point. And I ate a bowl of sancocho while [my family] passed around the award and took pictures,” she said when we spoke recently. Pointing to an imaginary serving of the traditional, meat-and-vegetable-heavy stew her family eats in Harlem and on each trip back to her parents’ native Dominican Republic, she added: “I was like, ‘This is winning.’”
For many writers of color, including Acevedo, the past several years have ushered in a long-overdue cultural renaissance within publishing. In an industry, and genre, that has rarely elevated the work of people of color, Acevedo’s National Book Award win isn’t just a personal milestone. As one of remarkably few authors of color to earn the honor, Acevedo is also helping to shift the broader literary landscape. For readers of all backgrounds, books like Acevedo’s that focus on the everyday experiences of young people of color are their own reward.

The Poet X, Acevedo’s prize-earning work, is narrated by a Dominican American teenager named Xiomara Batista. As she notices her changing body drawing unwanted attention from boys and men, Xiomara starts to feel isolated from the community around her—and clashes often with her devout Catholic mother. Simmering with adolescent angst, the 15-year-old Harlemite begins to find solace in poems.
At turns meditative and forceful, much of the book’s propulsive energy is culled from Acevedo’s own background in slam poetry. Fittingly, The Poet X is written entirely in verse. Of the urgent inspiration that follows Xiomara’s first time attending an open-mic night at New York City’s famed Nuyorican Poets Cafe, for example, the text reads:

Late into the night I write and
the pages of my notebook swell
from all the words I’ve pressed onto them.
It almost feels like
the more I bruise the page
the quicker something inside me heals.

The Poet X mapped a young woman’s circuitous journey to self-actualization through her affinity for language. Acevedo’s second novel finds its protagonist delighting in—and growing through—a different form of expression: culinary homecomings similar to the one the author experienced the night of her National Book Award win. With the Fire on High, which was released earlier this month, is a coming-of-age story told in prose by Emoni Santiago, a teen mother living in the Fairhill neighborhood of Philadelphia.
Emoni is a preternaturally talented cook, and With the Fire on High unfurls her complex family history partly through hybridized recipes from Puerto Rico and the American South as it raises the stakes of her culinary ambitions. In one early scene, the 17-year-old relays an experience of walking into her grandmother’s kitchen after a long day of school. With the music of the salsa legend Marc Anthony blasting through the radio, “’Buela pulls out the herbs that she gets directly from el campo in Puerto Rico and sets them on the counter. The sweet-smelling yerba buena, the Caribbean oregano. She hands me the knives before I ask for them, cleans the cutting board before I realize I need it rinsed.”
For Acevedo, the kitchen functions similarly to the stage—as a site for self-expression and communal connections. These scenes marry both possibilities. “A lot of my stories are about family and how families disappoint us and how we build families and what we need from family,” the 31-year-old author noted. “And what else gathers you in the same way that a meal does?”

Acevedo, who traced her Dominican family’s African heritage in her poetry before she began experimenting with fiction, writes books that explore the interiority of young Afro-Latinas. This focus is a natural one for the author, whose work feels both meticulous and lived-in even when it diverges from autobiographical elements. And readers have noticed the interplay between her skillful craft and narrative investment: In addition to winning the National Book Award, The Poet X was a New York Times best seller. It also accrued a series of accolades, including a Michael Printz Award for Excellence in Young Adult Literature and the Association for Library Service to Children’s 2019 Pura Belpré Award, which is given to a Latino author “whose work best portrays, affirms, and celebrates the Latino cultural experience.”
Acevedo’s ascent, like that of several prominent new authors, has also signaled a slow shift in a notoriously homogeneous industry. Angie Thomas’s 2017 The Hate U Give, which has since been adapted into an Amandla Stenberg–led film, followed a young black teenager wrestling with the police killing of her best friend; it was joined later that year by Nic Stone’s Dear Martin, which tells the story of a teenager who writes letters to the late Dr. King. The Nigerian American author Tomi Adeyemi’s Children of Blood and Bone fused speculative fantasy with West African spiritual traditions. The prolific poet and author Jason Reynolds has written several books depicting catalytic experiences of black teenagers across the country, including the Marvel young-adult novel Miles Morales: Spider-Man.

This is an expansion that Acevedo finds heartening. “For a long time, there was this [notion] that depictions of characters of color would not sell the book. And I’m so happy to see more black girls, more brown girls, more black boys—their faces on books and reshaping what we think will make readers ‘afraid’ to buy a book versus how compelling it can be to see yourself,” she said. “But also to see someone different than yourself as a hero. Imagine how much would be undone if we saw depictions of heroes who were black.”
Still, Acevedo’s variety of work remains a statistical rarity in her genre. And she is careful to note that even the perceived groundswell is not entirely new: the window from 2012 to 2014 brought a notable push for diversity in children’s literature. Five years ago, the late author Walter Dean Myers wrote an essay for The New York Times decrying the glaring discrepancy in the number of stories with white protagonists and those with protagonists of color. Myers’s Times piece led with a jarring statistic: “Of 3,200 children’s books published in 2013, just 93 were about black people.” A social-media campaign titled We Need Diverse Books soon followed, and has since become a nonprofit organization that advocates for systemic change within the publishing industry and celebrates the work of authors from varied backgrounds.
The effects of centuries’ worth of literary erasure have been far-reaching. If it follows that literature helps shape the worldview—and capacity for empathy—of those who consume it, then the comparative lack of meaningful stories featuring people of color has contributed to broader social chasms. “I think of the state of the country right now and I’m like, I can tell who reads fiction. I can tell which of our politicians read fiction,” Acevedo said. “I can tell which of them have read things that don’t look like them or sound like them or depict who they come from. You know.”

Taken at face value, the gradual steps to rectify the publishing industry’s entrenched biases are encouraging. And this moment is, for young readers in particular, a fairly exciting time to be accessing work that offers nuanced representations of their experiences. Acevedo is cautiously optimistic about the genre’s future, her musings on the industry often giving way to expressions of curiosity. “I think young adult, children’s literature, is listening and people are trying, but the changes have to be systemic and in the institutions. It’s not just that the characters are black or Latinx. Who are the writers?” she asked. “Who are the assistant editors? Who are the copy editors? Who are the graphic designers? Who’s the publisher? … Do these books love young people? Is it clear that the author loves them?”
Acevedo has been intentional about accounting for gaps in her own knowledge. For With the Fire on High, that meant explicitly seeking feedback on her portrayals of themes like teen motherhood, Afro–Puerto Rican heritage, and the pulse of Philadelphia (there’s a hearty sprinkling of “jawns” in the book). Even as Acevedo and her peers take note of considerations like these, some authors remain frustrated that the broader publishing apparatus still struggles to pay critical attention to their craft. Or, as many writers have remarked in pithy tweets, a surplus of invitations to diversity panels—and precious few to events or media opportunities focused on writing itself.
For Acevedo, that’s meant exponentially more press about her identities than the technical elements of her books. “I wish I was asked about how specific the line breaks were to ensure that the eye ended on particular words,” she said of the conversations she’s had about The Poet X. “I wish I was asked about why birds [reappear throughout the book] … and what it means for [Xiomara] to be in a biology class where she’s thinking about evolving.”

Acevedo’s work, as a whole, is a project of rigorous, interdisciplinary citation. The author was a poet and an English teacher before she was a novelist, and an aspiring rapper before she found her way to poetry slams, but her first exposure to the comfort and challenge of storytelling came from the myths her mother recounted during Acevedo’s childhood. “I did not have a lot of Disney growing up. We didn’t necessarily read fairy tales at night. But my mom would tell me about where she was from, and she’s what we could call a campesina: based in rural life, in the countryside,” she said. “My grandfather drove oxen for other people, the equivalent of what we call a sharecropper here in the United States. My grandmother had 15 kids and would feed those children and the neighbors.”
She continued: “I grew up listening to these stories that felt so far from my experience in Morningside Heights and from what I thought I knew, but also collapsed what I knew of place and home. That distance … felt fantastical … For me [the mysticism] was so cool—like this dictator who was there for 30 years, of course he had an army of witches like my mom told me he did! How else would you remain in power for 30 years unless you had espionage with magic?!”

Both of Acevedo’s books channel sensory elements differently. With the Fire on High, for example, deploys magical realism in a tradition that Acevedo likens to the Mexican author Laura Esquivel’s seminal novel, Like Water for Chocolate. When Emoni cooks meals for her loved ones, they respond with intense emotion—not just to the magnitude of her culinary talent, but also to her food’s ability to conjure their own specific memories. “It’s everyday magic. It’s not fantasy. It’s a regular-ass girl from this neighborhood [in North Philadelphia],” Acevedo said of her character’s talent. “And so if it’s her, it can be any of these kids.
“I don’t wanna keep talking about exceptional young people. It can seem that that’s what I’m doing in my work because both my main characters are gifted, but they are [each] one of many,” she added. “Because we’re focusing on them we see their magic, but if I had chosen a different character from that same cast, they also would be brilliant because kids are, and kids from these spaces are. We discount it.”

In pulling from diasporic food traditions, mythologies, and music (the books are peppered with references to rappers from New York and Philadelphia, Latin pop singers, and bachateros) throughout her writing, Acevedo offers readers of all ages books that buoy narrative fidelity with craft that serves as a map of her characters’ environments. The syntax of The Poet X and the immersive sensory elements of With the Fire on High point to their protagonists’ identities as clearly as the characters’ names.

Acevedo’s work thrills partly because of the diligence and specificity with which she captures their responses to the ground shifting beneath them. Or, as she put it, “I am interested in a character that is not a caricature, that is tender and ferocious pretty much across the board—typically a young woman of color, different than depictions that we have seen.”



Like Spinal Tap, Elizabeth Gilbert goes to 11. Whether it’s the depths of her despair in Eat, Pray, Love, the intensity of her research in her fiction, or the openness with which she shares her life—romantic and otherwise—with her rabid fans, she lives in bold.

Gilbert has something of a two-track career, toggling between carefully crafted fiction and confessional creative essays. The latter, of course, made her a guru for thousands of women who longed for a similar arc of self-discovery and a thrilling life. Now, after the death of her partner Rayya Elias, Gilbert has written a new novel, City of Girls, set in 1940s New York. The work follows a privileged woman’s adventures, headstrong mistakes, and growing self-knowledge. It’s sprawling and colorful, with characters firing off dialogue that would fit in a Howard Hawks movie. I spoke with her about her book, her craft, and what it means to be Elizabeth Gilbert. This interview has been edited and condensed for clarity.

Lizzie O’Leary: This new book inhabits a very complete and discrete world: a sort of crumbling, pre–World War II theater scene with a naive, self-absorbed young woman in it. What was the spark for creating this?

Elizabeth Gilbert: A couple of things. I always feel like there are multiple sparks, and then they conjoin. And then you have a match, and then hopefully it becomes a torch. But I can tell you some of them. One is that I came upon an out-of-print book of essays by Alexander Woollcott, who was, of course, one of the Algonquin Round Table figures, and a critic and columnist for The New Yorker. He was really famous in his day and not at all now.

But it was a collection that included a bunch of profiles that he’d written through the 1930s and ’40s of stage actresses who were coming to New York to work on various productions. There’s something impossibly glamorous about the world that he was describing: going to the Sherry-Netherland in the afternoon and sitting down with the great thespian Katharine Cornell and talking about her upcoming role as Lady Macbeth. I just thought, I want to be in that world.

In a larger sense, I’ve wanted for years to write a novel about promiscuous girls whose lives are not ruined by the often ill-advised choices that they make. And I feel like that’s a difficult book to find in the Western canon, because girls are always so terribly punished for their recklessness. I wanted to write a book about girls—not who get away with it, [not] who have consequence-free sex—but who managed to survive their consequences. A book about female sexual desire and how muscular and messy it can be.

O’Leary: I don’t think I realized that the 1940s involved so much casual sex. Tell me about that part of the research.

Gilbert: Well, I was lucky enough to get an incredible first-person source on that. I had that sense, too, as I was writing. I was thinking, How could there have been such a thing as this? 

We have such a naïveté in our imaginations about the reality of sex. There have always been people who have had a lot of sex. There has always been that girl who has come to New York City to test out her powers and the limits of her beauty and her allure. She just arrived in New York City yesterday, she came here in the ’20s, she was here in 1890. The theater world and the entertainment world are a magnet for that kind of girl.

From a historical perspective, you can often tell what people were doing by rules about what they weren’t allowed to do. And also by reading public health records about the spread of venereal disease and how people were getting abortions back then. But my greatest resource was a woman in her 90s named Norma. She had been a showgirl and a dancer at the Stork Club back in the day. She’d been John Wayne’s girlfriend. She was very open talking to me about the five abortions that she’d had in the course of her life—something she spoke about with absolutely no regret or remorse whatsoever—the dozens of lovers that she had, the various venereal diseases that she had, the time that Milton Berle bought her a car.

The primary focus of her life was unbridled sensual exploration. She never married, never had kids. She still lives in the same apartment that she moved into in 1952. And when I asked her, “Did you ever regret not getting married and not having children?” she just rolled her eyes and said, “Who the hell wants to have sex with the same guy for 60 years?” Except she didn’t say “have sex”; she used a much more vulgar term.

O’Leary: A lot of the action is set at the Lily Playhouse, and there is a tension between catering to the working-class neighborhood audience and creating this great big show. It made me wonder how much you think about your very fervent audience and what they want from you.

Gilbert: I think you’re referring to Aunt Peg in the book, my protagonist’s aunt, who runs a really shabby, run-down, almost burlesque theater in Midtown. [It’s] just far enough away from the bright lights of Broadway to not be glamorous, and just close enough to Tenth Avenue to be serving the working-class people of Hell’s Kitchen. She’d also done the same thing during [World War I] for soldiers. She’d come out of the war with a feeling that people are very stressed and in a lot of pain and they need diversion and I’m here to provide it.

So I feel like this book is my version of this at a time that’s not dissimilar to how people were feeling in 1940. There’s a tremendous cloud of dread hanging over the entire dumpster fire of the world right now. I don’t know anybody who’s not stressed and anxious and depressed. What I wanted to give at this moment is a book that would go down like a tray of champagne cocktails and give you a little bit of diversion.

When I wrote The Signature of All Things, for instance, I really did want to write a big, serious, epic, intellectual novel. I knew that I would lose a lot of my readers by doing that, and I was okay with that. I feel like my readers and I don’t owe anything to one another.

O’Leary: Really? They buy your books.

Gilbert: But they’re not required to. And the reason I know that is because they often don’t. They bought millions of copies of Eat, Pray, Love, but they bought dozens of copies of Committed, the book that came after it, because they didn’t want that one. I couldn’t make them if I tried. Likewise, I feel great love and intimacy for them and the interactions that we have, but I don’t feel like I owe them anything either. I should create the work that I want to create and they’re welcome to come along with it if they want to.

O’Leary: I want to ask you about the Brave Magic retreat that you and Cheryl Strayed have done. There was a piece by a writer named Laura Cathcart Robbins in HuffPost about being the only black woman there. Have you read that?

Gilbert: I have read it, yeah. And I was really glad that she wrote it, because it was thoughtful and important. It was an awakening for me as well.

O’Leary: How so?

Gilbert: It was … God. There’s a limit to how much I want to talk about this in a way, and it’s only because I don’t think we need white people talking about white privilege that much. But I will say that it’s changed the way that I’m operating. It was a tricky situation, because it was an open-registration event. We set aside a number of scholarship tickets for people who could apply based on need. It was in Northern California, which is very white, at the Redwoods, which is very white. Our readers are very white.

There’s also something problematic about me saying black women should love my work. But I was distressed by the same exact thing that the woman who was there was distressed by, and I was really grateful that she wrote about it. I’ve been working with my speaking agent and the people who I create these events with to try to figure out how to remedy that. A lot of it is just about going to different locations. So for instance, how about I don’t do that retreat in Napa Valley? Why don’t I go to Jackson, Mississippi, instead and just bring it to a different audience?

I’ve also, in the last year, been doing that exact same retreat for free at various nonprofit organizations. And there is also something problematic about assuming that the reason that there weren’t black women in the audience is because it cost too much.

I’m trying to create events where I can take my spotlight and put it on somebody who might not have the spotlight that I have, and create more diversity not just in the audience, but on the stage. All of this is stuff that I’m working toward remedying; it’s an imperfect science. But what she said needed to be said.

O’Leary: I’ve noticed that in your work and in your reflections on life you treat things such as Ideas and Grief with capital letters, as their own things that exist and don’t necessarily belong to you. Can you explain that concept?

Gilbert: The simplest way to explain my general worldview is it’s kind of pagan. I think that everything is animate and everything has consciousness and will. I don’t think it is a metaphor. When I speak about [an idea] having will and consciousness, it comes and gets your attention and kind of uses you, almost parasitically, to make itself come into being.

It seems to make it easier to do that work … You’re a little bit off the hook. It’s kind of [like] I can make bigger leaps of faith because I believe that a lot of [life] is a mystery and that it’s not all coming from me.

O’Leary: You used the phrase off the hook. I wonder if there is the potential to abdicate responsibility for one’s own emotions and experiences by using this as an animating philosophy. Does it let you skate through life without thinking about the consequences and maybe how they affect other people?

Gilbert: I don’t think life itself will let you do that. I think when you’re out of integrity, you’ll find out very quickly, because exactly that will happen: You’ll get hurt or other people will get hurt and the consequences will rain down upon you and you’ll know it. So there’s a sort of a self-correcting mechanism in there. Also, I think that I have a tremendous amount of reverence for creativity itself, and for the privilege that I have to engage with it, and so the responsibility that I feel is to show up at the very highest possible level that I can. That’s how I remain responsible.

O’Leary: The book also wrestles with the idea of being a person of honor and not turning away from your mistakes. I went back and read this essay you wrote about being a seduction addict. Do you still think of yourself that way?

Gilbert: No. I don’t do what I used to do. I don’t think I would have written that article and revealed that about myself if I still behaved the way that I used to behave.

O’Leary: You fall in love a lot.

Gilbert: Yeah, but there’s a difference between that and seduction … I do fall in love a lot, thank goodness. I put a lot of myself out there in the world. But I behave with honesty, and I think all addiction is based on dissembling and lying, and I can’t do that anymore. Not for very long, anyway, without finding myself in a lot of pain. So I think that’s the major difference.

O’Leary: How do you decide what to share and what to keep private? You expose a lot of what you think and what you’re going through.

Gilbert: I don’t have a process other than my own intuition. I don’t have any rules about it, actually. I wouldn’t know how to set them. I don’t have a social-media manager. I’ve never had a meeting with an expert about how to do this. I just share when I’m ready to share, and I couldn’t even begin to tell you what the calculus is for that other than just deciding that it’s time.

O’Leary: I was looking back through Eat, Pray, Love and I wonder if, for you, it feels like a book of a person in her 30s, where your 30s are consumed with who you are and making it true, and your 40s are like, “Oh, my back hurts and I don’t really care what anyone thinks of me.”

Gilbert: I hadn’t read it in 10 years, but the 10-year anniversary came up recently and my publisher asked me to write a foreword to it. I thought I should probably read it before I write a foreword.

I don’t know if it’s a book for women in their 30s, but it’s certainly a book written by a woman in her 30s. I was struck by how much shame there was in that book, and how apologetic I was as a narrator, about myself, and how embarrassed I was by the fact that I wanted to go on a spiritual journey. I kind of roll myself under the bus a lot in that book.

There is a paragraph that really struck me and actually made me very sad, which is when I was in Italy. I’m having this great meal and I’m actually feeling good, and I’m writing about how, for the first time in three years, I actually feel good. And then I said something that was like, “I know that eventually I’m going to have to settle down and become a responsible, productive, contributing adult. I promise that I will do that soon but just a little while longer let me just do this now.”

And I think that insecurity of a 34-year-old woman who’s saying, “Conventional life; I tried it … I’m going to go do this thing, but I promise it’s just for a year and then I’ll settle down again and I’ll be normal again” didn’t work for me. That’s an insecurity I don’t have anymore. That’s a promise I would never make to anybody again.



When I first encountered The Cure, I was lost. I was 16 and had recently moved from Florida to Denver with my family. We were poor, which added an extra dimension of alienation as I tried to adjust to a new school. On top of that, I was grappling with the onset of what I wouldn’t realize until decades later was bipolar II disorder. The music of The Cure, equal parts menacing and cleansing, split my life in half. Before it, I was a moody wallflower who had no idea who he was. After it, I began to find myself.

Disintegration, the British band’s eighth album, came out soon after I turned 17—or 30 years ago this week. Nothing could’ve prepared me for it. The group’s record immediately prior, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me, was a double-length affair that trafficked in psychedelia and disco. The smorgasbord of an album was The Cure’s equivalent of The Clash’s notoriously indulgent Sandinista!, and I adored it. Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me echoed all the wild mood swings (to borrow the name of a Cure album that wouldn’t be released until 1996) of my emerging bipolar disorder. But Disintegration was different. I bought it in May 1989, took it home, and expected the cassette to unspool with splashes of neon color and vivid emotion, as had Kiss Me. Instead, the record wove a single mood—depressive solitude—and majestically adorned itself in it.

Despite their reputation as the figureheads of gloomy goth, The Cure had always been tonally playful. They debuted in 1979 with short, spiky, post-punk songs about boys crying and Albert Camus. They delivered a trio of devastatingly stark albums in the early ’80s—Seventeen Seconds, Faith, and Pornography—that trawled the sludge of the frontman Robert Smith’s soul. Then they went psychedelic. Then they went pop. Then they threw everything against the wall with Kiss Me. Then, like the ultimate contraction of our own universe, their Big Bang led to an entropic collapse, which they fittingly titled Disintegration.

“A protracted wallow in the misery of love unrequited or recalled in hopeless desolation” is what Britain’s Q magazine called Disintegration upon its release, adding, “Eleven years and eight studio albums into The Cure’s career and [Smith is] still playing the confused adolescent adrift in suburban heartbreak. Things could hardly be worse.” Many critics and fans were bummed by what they saw as the monochromatic sameness of Disintegration. It was as if John, Paul, George, and Ringo, immediately after the kaleidoscope of Sgt. Pepper’s, decided to release Meet the Beatles. For some, Disintegration felt like a backslide at best, a self-parody at worst; I was one of those people at first. Budding music critic that I was, I felt dumbfounded by The Cure’s regression into molasses-paced glumness. I had just spent an entire year of my life defending The Cure to anyone who would listen, trying to argue that they weren’t the cartoonish goth band everyone at my high school thought they were. And here was Smith, living up to the stereotype.

I came around, as did many other listeners. Disintegration soon became The Cure’s mainstream breakthrough, spawning a hit U.S. single in the form of “Lovesong,” an elegiac hymn to undying romance that captured the heart and imagination of the radio-listening and record-buying public at large. Initially, the song seemed to me to be too simple and direct for The Cure. A love song called “Lovesong”? Up to that point, Smith had shrouded his sentiments in literary references and lush metaphors. Now, it appeared, he was going straight for popularity’s throat.





The more I immersed myself in the album, though, the more I realized that Smith wasn’t just aiming for the mainstream by simplifying his work. He was trying to boil down The Cure’s music into primal archetypes. Done with taking an elliptical approach, Smith opted to evoke the religious awe of romance with “Plainsong,” followed directly by “Pictures of You,” a sprawl of anguished longing that employed the most basic modern symbol of memory, the photograph, as its primary vehicle. “Lullaby” was exactly as advertised, a delicate if perverse catalog of creepy imagery and dreamy weirdness. “Fascination Street” plumbed the guts of obsession and lust.

Disintegration, however, was more than the sum of its songs. The way “Plainsong” pivots into “Pictures of You” with exquisite weightlessness is one of the most graceful moments in the history of music. The throbbing desolation of “Closedown” gave way to the oddly wistful bounce of “Lovesong.” The epic, nine-minute swoon that was “The Same Deep Water as You” reconstituted itself as the epic, eight-minute swoon that was Disintegration’s title track. The Cure had been inaccurately pegged as a band of miserablism, in spite of the many tones and moods they’d mastered during their first decade as a band. Disintegration was a sharp about-face from the group’s under-recognized eclecticism. On the album, each song sounds like a cover of the song before it, slowly building in enormity and despair through this recursion. As a kid who was starting to go through long episodes of lethargy and hopelessness, it was a sound that synced up with my soul.

Bipolar II often appears during one’s teen years, and it almost as often goes undetected at first. Such was the case with me. I had no idea why I would alternate between periods of great overconfidence and elation, otherwise known as hypomania, and episodes of extreme depression. I barely realized on a rational level that those changes were even happening, trapped inside them as I was. But deep down, the music of The Cure resonated with my new internal discord. If Kiss Me had been like a hypomanic episode, full of fireworks and fanfare, Disintegration was like a depressive episode, sluggish and sad in a way that teetered between self-reflection and self-destruction. At the same time, the album allowed me to step outside myself, to examine my feelings from a safe perspective, and to remind myself that something constructive—even beautiful—can come from the lowest emotion.

“Any record that makes you feel anything is a good experience, even if it did take you down to the depths of despair,” Smith said of Disintegration in a 1989 interview for OOR magazine. “At least it encouraged you to feel something, and in a paradoxical way, if it makes you feel depressed, it doesn’t because you’re feeling something.” At the time, the frontman was just turning 30. It’s a time of life when youth seems, for the first time, to be slipping away, and earnest thoughts of aging and mortality start to seep into one’s everyday thinking. “But,” joked Smith in the same interview, turning 30 was “not as bad as being 18.” Being 17 when Disintegration came out, I couldn’t have agreed more. It’s a tough age for most people, whether they have mental-health struggles or not. Thankfully I had Disintegration: a map, a companion, and a reassurance that as long as I was still feeling something, I wasn’t lost.



This article contains mild spoilers throughout Season 2 of Fleabag.

Fleabag doesn’t follow her older sister’s lead. The titular protagonist of Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s ecstatic Amazon Prime series has mostly tripped her way into a chaotic, circuitous life path. The resolutely uptight Claire (played by Sian Clifford), by contrast, has forged a meticulous plan. The two sisters are almost uncannily different: Where Claire is propelled by a suffocating sense of duty to those around her, Fleabag (played by Waller-Bridge) struggles to show meaningful consideration to even those whom she most loves. By the end of the show’s devastating first season, the reckless antiheroine had alienated everyone in her life, and Claire was no exception.
But the show’s second and final season begins with a sign that Fleabag might be capable of bridging that gap. At the start of Episode 1, the sisters, having been forced to gather for a group dinner organized to celebrate their father’s engagement to their godmother, regard each other with uneasiness. “Nice jumpsuit,” Claire first says to Fleabag, the terse phrase more an accusation than a compliment. But late into the tumultuous dinner that animates the episode, Fleabag notices that her estranged sister has been missing from the table for a while. Rising from her seat, Fleabag heads to the restaurant bathroom to find Claire.
What begins as a lighthearted, if also vulgar, inquiry suddenly shifts into a gut-wrenching moment of unexpected connection. “Claire? You’ve been ages. Are you pissed off, or are you doing a poo?” Fleabag asks as she approaches Claire’s stall. After Claire requests a sanitary napkin, Fleabag opens the stall door and lightly mocks her about her period—until Claire corrects her through tears and gritted teeth: “It’s not a period. It’s a fucking miscarriage, okay?”

In its second season, Fleabag deepens its portrayal of the sisters’ relationship not by glossing over their past transgressions, but by allowing them to coexist alongside surprising moments of fierce protectiveness. Describing the miscarriage scene, which took seven hours to film, Clifford recently told Vulture, “There’s no question that they are there for each other. It’s such a beautiful representation of sisterhood. It’s like, Forget everything else, I will be here to support you.”
The show, acerbic as ever, doesn’t present a vision of “support” that suddenly finds Fleabag assuming the role of caretaker extraordinaire. Viewers would find it jarring to see her seamlessly cast off her own insecurities or adopt a near-parental posturing. Instead, Fleabag’s willingness to shock—to defy expectations of ladylike, responsible behavior—enables her to protect Claire. When the sisters return to the dinner table and Claire feigns enjoyment instead of expressing a need to go to the hospital, Fleabag interrupts the party’s hollow chatter: “Oh, for fuck’s sake, stop it!” she screams, then later offers an unanticipated reason for her anger when goaded: “I j … I just had a little ... I just … I had a … a little m-miscarriage.”

Medical concerns aside, Fleabag’s deflection from her sister’s miscarriage serves as a startling balm. When Claire’s rotten husband, Martin (Brett Gelman), immediately begins to rattle off horrific commentary—“It’s like a ‘goldfish out of the bowl’ sort of thing. If it didn’t wanna be in there, it didn’t wanna be in there”—it’s Fleabag who bears the blows. Fleabag’s decision to disrupt the dinner party by claiming the miscarriage as her own offers Claire the one thing she most needed: freedom to address, or avoid, her own pain without the burden of simultaneously soothing everyone else around her.

Fleabag’s depiction of the sisters’ relationship is the true love story of its second season, and perhaps the whole series. Season 2’s attention to their shaky bond retroactively lends more gravity to the first season’s depiction of its splintering. That Fleabag would stand up for her sister, however awkwardly, in front of Martin lends new heartbreak to the fact that Martin’s attempt to kiss Fleabag in Season 1 is what catalyzed the sisters’ most recent falling-out. (The show is also careful to suggest that the siblings already felt a sense of separation from each other, and from their father, following their mother’s death.)
Thankfully, Fleabag and Claire do not immediately embrace each other after the dinner-party scene. Like all relationships, sisterhood can be hard. Years of discontent and resentment do not disappear after one grand gesture, after all. The rest of the season finds them engaged in a familiar, emotional tug-of-war: Fleabag constantly fears disappointing Claire; Claire constantly fears Fleabag disappointing her. The show captures the tangled vulnerability of sisterhood with an eye toward its tensions. In an entertainment landscape that rarely grants women characters the range to be challenging, Fleabag’s commitment to exploring the sisters’ anxieties about (and slow progress toward) each other is a breath of fresh air.

Not all of Claire and Fleabag’s journey toward tentative reconciliation is as tonally jarring as the miscarriage scene. Later in the season, Fleabag calms her sister down after Claire asks for—and receives—a truly horrific haircut. (“I look like a pencil!” Claire screams, pointing to the asymmetrical creation atop her head.) To the extent that dramatic haircuts can serve as a proxy for wanting a big life change, this decision signals Claire’s small shift toward addressing the unhappiness she feels in her life—and especially her marriage. But it’s the season’s final episode, in which Claire sports and then abandons an amusing false ponytail, that brings her most sudden and heartrending admission. When Fleabag and Claire debate the merits of the latter following a possible love interest to Finland, the elder sister assures Fleabag of a simple, unwavering truth: “The only person I’d run through an airport for is you.”



A common refrain in film criticism these days is that there are too many superhero franchises. Studios’ nonstop efforts to launch new cinematic comic-book brands have choked theaters to the point where you can barely enter a multiplex without knocking over a cardboard standee of a caped crusader or two. Now the glut has reached the level of more specific complaints: There aren’t just too many superhero franchises; there are also too many Hellboy franchises. For some ungodly reason, Mike Mignola’s cult series for the indie label Dark Horse Comics—which was already beautifully adapted for the big screen by Guillermo del Toro—is back in the hands of a new creative team, which does an awful job of justifying its return.

Hellboy—a 7-foot-tall red behemoth with filed-down horns and an oversize, rocky right hand—is undoubtedly an arresting figure to lead a movie with. As played by Ron Perlman in del Toro’s two films (released in 2004 and 2008), he was a solid match for the director’s love of monster movies and heroic outcasts. Hellboy was a wisecracking but gentle giant who wrestled with his own demonic impulses while trying to save the planet from whatever supernatural hordes were threatening it. But in the 2019 reboot, directed by the British horror specialist Neil Marshall (who made The Descent, Doomsday, and two of Game of Thrones’ most epic installments), all the gentleness has been shorn off. The end result is an R-rated slog that’s heavy on bad attitude and creative dismemberments, and completely missing the humane core of Mignola’s original story.

The new Hellboy, played by David Harbour, is now more of a beastly brawler: a tequila-slamming paranormal cop with a mean streak and a tendency to shoot first (with his gargantuan gun) and ask questions later. He works for the Bureau for Paranormal Research and Defense, an extra-secret American governmental agency hunting creepy-crawlies around the globe. His father, Trevor Bruttenholm (Ian McShane), who adopted him when he was summoned from hell as a baby, is on hand to distribute appropriate amounts of gravitas when needed. But most of the plot of Hellboy is a flimsy excuse to jump between a string of action set pieces, all of them crackling with juvenile energy, as our red-faced hero massacres a succession of personality-free beasties bent on ending the world.

The chief villain is a witch named Nimue (Milla Jovovich), dubbed “The Blood Queen,” who was cut into pieces by King Arthur in the sixth century and has returned to exact her revenge. Jovovich, of the Resident Evil series, is an ideal B-movie villainess, with a screen presence striking enough to help elevate the basest nonsense. Here, though, she’s got nothing to do but glower at the camera and boss her minions around, building up to a disappointing showdown with Hellboy. Her acolytes exist only for Hellboy to dispatch, while the entire screenplay has the depth and intelligence of a Pantera album cover.

Even the violence itself is painfully unsubtle, with every action sequence designed to be set to screeching guitar riffs. I’ve never seen so many variations on impaling in one comic-book movie, or so many jutting bones. In del Toro’s movies (particularly the glorious Hellboy II: The Golden Army), the death of a monster, even a villainous one, was treated with a kind of reverence and grace—the director had such obvious admiration for his otherworldly creatures, and felt such sorrow about killing them. In this new Hellboy, Marshall can’t wait to unleash the gore.

One can imagine a version of this film that’s a charming piece of basement horror, in which the approach is all-out R-rated mayhem. But Hellboy follows the plodding hero’s-journey beats of all its franchise brethren, and so its visceral flourishes read as nothing more than a desperate attempt to sell this particular reboot through the addition of blood and guts alone. A talented ensemble, including Sasha Lane, Daniel Dae Kim, and Sophie Okonedo, is entirely wasted as Hellboy’s supernatural allies. And the final battle, which wreaks havoc around London, feels entirely without stakes. A new take on Hellboy was never going to be necessary. But in trying to set itself apart, this film ends up perfectly laying out the case against its own existence.



Emily Dickinson was 31 and entirely unknown in the literary world when she came across Thomas Wentworth Higginson’s “Letter to a Young Contributor” in the April 1862 issue of The Atlantic. Hoping for guidance in her writing, she reached out to Higginson that month with four poems and a brief, unsigned letter. “Mr. Higginson,” she began, “Are you too deeply occupied to say if my verse is alive?”

That first shy correspondence began a decades-long mentorship that culminated, four years after Dickinson’s death, in Higginson helping to publish her first poetry collection. Only 10 of her poems were published before she died at the age of 56, all anonymously and none in the pages of The Atlantic. But the magazine printed dozens of them posthumously. These 10 previously unpublished poems, featured in the February 1929 issue, were the first to appear. — Annika Neklason





By the time he took to the pages of The Atlantic to make the case for black suffrage in 1866, Frederick Douglass had long since established himself as one of America’s most significant writers and political advocates. He escaped a life of bondage in Maryland at the age of 20 and fled north, becoming a powerful voice in the abolitionist movement and, after the Civil War set in, a sometime adviser to Abraham Lincoln. He remained a vocal proponent of racial and gender equality through the rise and fall of Reconstruction and during the onset of Jim Crow, before dying in 1895.

Robert Hayden paid tribute to Douglass in a poem published in The Atlantic half a century after Douglass’s death, writing that his legacy would carry him into a time when the freedom he fought for—never realized in his lifetime—was finally won. In that dreamed-of future, Hayden imagined, Douglass “shall be remembered … not with statues’ rhetoric, / not with legends and poems and wreaths of bronze alone, / but with the lives … / fleshing his dream of the needful, beautiful thing.”

Hayden had his own bright future to look forward to, and his own legacy to sow: In 1976, he was appointed the country’s first African American poet laureate. — Annika Neklason





William Carlos Williams is best remembered for his spare and evocative poems: “So much depends / upon // a red wheel / barrow,” and “I have eaten / the plums / that were in / the icebox.” But in between nights spent writing poetry, he devoted most of his time to working with children as the chief of pediatrics at a New Jersey hospital. With this poem, dedicated to his grandson, he blended the two strands of his working life in a page of children’s verse.

Published in 1956, “The Turtle” was the only poem that Williams contributed to The Atlantic before dying seven years later. Five more characteristic pieces of his work were printed posthumously. — Annika Neklason





Sylvia Plath was just 23 and two months removed from her graduation from Smith College when The Atlantic published “Circus in Three Rings,” the first of several Plath pieces featured in the magazine before she took her own life eight years later. The chaotic hurricane she imagines rending a circus in the poem mirrors the emotional upheaval of her own life—her “extravagant heart blows up again,” “a rose of jeopardy flames in [her] hair,” “the gnawings of love begin.”

Plath’s relationship with The Atlantic was not without its own stormy moments. In a letter accompanying two short stories from 1959, she reminded an editor that she had “waited over half a year for a No” after her last submission, and wondered “if I could get a faster verdict this time.” None of her fiction was accepted by the magazine during her lifetime, but one story was printed posthumously—joining this and five more of her poems in our archives. — Annika Neklason





This poem was published in The Atlantic’s September 1939 issue, shortly after W. H. Auden immigrated to America, on the day that German troops marched into Poland and World War II began. First printed alongside an account of life inside an early Nazi concentration camp and a timely story on the Polish military, “Crisis” is a meditation on the creeping horror of fascism and the dread of invasion. 

It acted as an unofficial prologue to Auden’s famous poem on the beginning of the war, “September 1, 1939,” and as an introduction of his writing to The Atlantic. In the ensuing 35 years, 12 more of his poems and two prose pieces appeared in the magazine. — Annika Neklason





Adrienne Rich began and concluded her relationship with Atlantic readers by writing about endings. She was just 23 years old when the magazine first published one of her poems: “Annotation for an Epitaph,” an elegy for a lost sinner. Seven more pieces of her work were printed in The Atlantic over the next seven years as she began her life as a wife and mother.

In the following decades, both the style and the subject matter of her writing changed considerably, reflecting her dedication to anti-war, civil-rights, and feminist activism. But all of that was still ahead when she made her last contribution to the magazine in 1959, contemplating leaving for an unknown place in “Exodus.” — Annika Neklason





Mary Oliver’s poetry, frequently featured in the magazine in the 1980s and ’90s, evokes other generations of Atlantic contributors whom she grew up reading and admiring. With her reverent communion with the natural world, she recalls the transcendentalist musings of Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau; with her tender expressions of joy and melancholy, the impassioned verse of Walt Whitman. But her writing also possessed an unassuming insight, a simplicity of expression, and a depth of feeling that was particular to her, and that made her one of the country’s best-selling poets for years before she died this January.

“Moccasin Flowers,” published in the magazine’s June 1987 issue, captures all those qualities, celebrating the beautiful fervor of life in the face of oblivion’s “deep drowse.” — Annika Neklason





A year before his own work was first published in the magazine, Jorge Luis Borges was introduced to Atlantic readers in two articles in the January 1967 issue. He had by then already established an international reputation for his intelligent and labyrinthine writings, dispatches from what Keith Botsford described in one of the articles as “a Borges universe, which is like ours and yet somehow disquietingly different, alien, magic.” John Gunther, who had visited Borges in Argentina not long before, succinctly characterized him as a “specialist in the abstruse.”

The short stories and verse by Borges that were published in ensuing issues lived up to these introductions. In this poem, he conjures a surreal landscape of stone passages and creeping fear, seeking a specter who would provide companionship—and, maybe, feed on his flesh. — Annika Neklason





Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers will be discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts in installments.

David Sims: A crucial part of the lore of Game of Thrones—and the George R. R. Martin novels the show is based upon—is the sack of King’s Landing. The legendary attack happened long ago, at the end of the rebellion that put Robert Baratheon (remember him?) on the Iron Throne and forced the Targaryens from power. The sack was led by Tywin Lannister (remember him?) and was notorious for its brutality, as Tywin demonstrated his loyalty for the new king by brutally wiping aside the reign of the old. And it was repeated, even more terribly and bloodily, by Daenerys Targaryen on tonight’s episode, “The Bells,” as she swept away the remnants of the Baratheon–Lannister dynasty. The writers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss clearly wanted to drive one point home: Everything old is new again. But wasn’t this show supposed to be about ending the cycle of conquering for the sake of conquest, about breaking the wheel?

Of course, there’s still one episode to go, which could upend things further. But “The Bells,” an installment caked in terror and death, was meant to underscore a miserable truth about war: It destroys everything in its wake, most of all the common folk whose allegiances are being fought over. Daenerys has run rampant through the series as an all-powerful, dragon-riding warrior queen, taking eastern city after city with ease. Why wouldn’t she do the same in King’s Landing, a city she barely understands, one occupied by the woman who just executed her closest friends? The capital of Westeros is, after all, the site of her family’s greatest failure, when they were turfed out decades ago; her wrathful reclaiming of it made a sort of sense.

Except it didn’t. Not really. I can see the underlying story structure at work here, and perhaps it’s one that Martin laid out to Benioff and Weiss when he told them his general idea for how the A Song of Ice and Fire series will end. Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair wisely pointed out last week that Martin has long expressed his love for “The Scouring of the Shire,” the vicious, anticlimactic, penultimate chapter of The Lord of the Rings, where the heroic hobbits return to their idyllic home only to find it consumed by war and violence. Daenerys’s ride to victory would inevitably lead to chaos, so it’s reasonable to depict that chaos.

But so much of “The Bells” depended on Daenerys’s final attack being entirely vindictive and emotional—and far beyond anything she’s attempted before. Yes, the Dragon Queen has always had a passion for execution by fire, and yes, she is now without her two best counselors (Jorah and Missandei), who often kept her from acting recklessly. Still, the episode was written specifically to give her an out—to give Cersei and her remaining troops a chance to surrender, which they did, and perhaps spare King’s Landing from total annihilation. Instead, Daenerys, in nothing more than a fit of pique, decided not only to unleash her dragon on the Red Keep, but also to burn the city indiscriminately, incinerating street after street filled with the ordinary folk she intends to rule.

The show could have laid the groundwork for this turn; it didn’t. Daenerys has so long been presented as a leader who was fundamentally shaped by her experience as a captive piece of property, someone who abhorred slavery and had little taste for pure cruelty. Game of Thrones could have easily demonstrated the nasty reality of her fight for Westeros without putting the choice to massacre innocents directly on her shoulders. Instead, “The Bells” ended up painting one of the most pivotal plot points in the final season as an emotional lashing-out from a tired, lonely, paranoid young woman. That choice bodes poorly for the finale, since Jon was presented here as Daenerys’s counterpart, still holding on to his dignity and morality as his queen’s foreign-invasion force pillaged the city and killed civilians.

If the idea is that the “game” itself—the unending contest for the Iron Throne—is broken, well, I imagine every viewer figured that out a few episodes into the first season. The characters whom audiences have been invested in for so long had been evolving into something new, pointing toward a deeper change for this rich and fascinating fantasy world. Instead, in “The Bells,” more often than not, characters reverted to their base nature. Daenerys turned full Mad Queen. The Hound sought out his brother for one last battle. Jaime found Cersei and they died in each other’s arms. So many of these moments were well done—in general, this episode was beautifully executed and really well acted, with a lot of clean action and intelligent cross-cutting between set pieces. But it felt so hollow to me, the narrative stakes entirely obliterated, once Daenerys made her move. Lenika and Spencer, are you as disheartened as I am?

Lenika Cruz: The way last week’s episode ended, I had a feeling “The Bells” was going to portray and be a disaster, but the degree to which it did both still left me gobsmacked. This is, in my book, the worst Game of Thrones episode ever—though not in a technical sense, as you pointed out, David. The acting was spectacular. The effects were stunning. But that prowess was in service of a story that was extremely obvious in some ways (Dany becoming the Mad Queen, something fans have predicted for ages) and absolutely illogical in others (Dany burning babies alive mere hours after professing that “mercy is our strength”).

The Mad Queen thing in and of itself isn’t shocking, nor is it a bad storytelling move. Almost every major plot development in this episode—Dany razing King’s Landing, Jaime and Cersei being crushed to death together, Sandor and Gregor falling to their doom—could have made for an excellent penultimate installment. What I take issue with is how clumsily Dany’s transformation was portrayed—and that clumsiness, at this late stage in the show, with the stakes so high, feels unforgivable given how avoidable it was.

Maybe it’s a waste of space to list all the “ARE YOU SERIOUS?” moments of the episode, but I don’t want those to be totally overshadowed by all the grand spectacle. So here are some things that made me type in angry all-caps in my notes: Jaime wandering into King’s Landing with a hood and immediately taking the glove off his golden hand despite the fact that he knows his sister wants him dead and he would be very recognizable to any member of the Queensguard. Arya and the Hound also showing up, barely disguised, in King’s Landing at roughly the same time. Varys hastily setting fire to a scroll and then immediately placing it in a covered metal tin, which would have put out the fire (not to mention his horribly plotted spy efforts in general). The Hound changing his mind about Arya’s mission—right as they approach the Red Keep, after the fighting has broken out, after they’ve traveled thousands of miles from Winterfell—and telling the girl who assassinated the Night King she shouldn’t try to kill Cersei after all because … it’s too dangerous.  ¯\_(ツ)_/¯.

I could go on. But most frustrating is the fact that Daenerys, a character whose many virtues and moral blind spots Game of Thrones so skillfully sketched out over the years, suddenly lost her mind in the last couple of episodes because of the Targaryens’ well-documented predisposition to mental illness, the death of her best friends, and the fact that her nephew no longer wants to sleep with her. In its rush to deliver a wild reversal—or, if you want to be charitable, subversion—of everything the show had established about Dany’s deep-seated goodness and sense of justice, Game of Thrones all but destroyed her character. Where some viewers might see a satisfyingly awful upending of expectations about Dany’s supposed goodness, I see an unearned negation of the identity she spent years building for herself.

What I love about the show’s defining moments of horror—the death of Ned Stark, the Red Wedding, the death of Oberyn Martell, the destruction of the Sept of Baelor—was how perfectly they fit with everything that had come before while also catching me off guard. Perhaps Dany’s massacre wasn’t ever supposed to be part of that hallowed category but was meant to be its own class of inelegant monstrousness.

For all my unhappiness, I was still moved by a few scenes. My heart hurt during Jaime and Cersei’s final moments and when Arya tried to save a mother and daughter only to see them both melted by Drogon’s breath into a single, charred mass. Those doomed pairings, along with the Hound and the Mountain diving off the Red Keep steps in each other’s arms (a fitting end to Cleganebowl, I suppose), underlined how powerful the notion of dying together is—whether the animating reason is love or hate. I wonder whether this idea will be relevant for Jon and Dany in next week’s finale. Everything tells me that Jon must now defeat Dany and rule the Seven Kingdoms whether he wants to or not. More interesting and “Thrones-ian,” of course, would be if neither “wins”—if somehow the cruel destiny that brought these two together will want to see them entwined until the very end. Then again, as this episode suggested, I might no longer have a great sense of what is or isn’t Thrones-ian.

Spencer Kornhaber: I understand your dismay, but I’m going to mount a defense. The episode came into focus for me when the Hound thwacked off Darth Mountain’s helmet to reveal the bloated egg man beneath. “Yeah, that’s you—that’s what you’ve always been,” Sandor grumbled: not only a clutch line in a long-awaited duel, but also an explanation for what underlay the destruction of King’s Landing, which was a scandalous, wrenching, enthralling, and appropriate culmination for Game of Thrones.

Definitely, though, I groaned at various points throughout the mayhem. The mega-crossbows that had seemed so lethal on the seas an episode earlier became instant kindling; Tyrion’s plan for Jaime to sail away with Cersei was obviously DOA; Euron Greyjoy running into Jaime at the cave is the kind of TV coincidence no one wants. On the great question of the episode—what the hell are you doing, Daenerys?—it was impossible not to be baffled at first. But that’s because of the greater failing of the show lately: pacing. A series that used to meticulously, even tediously, build foundations for major character decisions instead has been sprinting through plot check marks. I’ve just become resigned to Benioff and Weiss’s shoddy motivation-explaining, I suppose. With just six episodes this season and seven in the previous, there hasn’t been a long enough runway for Dany’s murderous departure.

Still, the pieces of her decision-making apparatus were all on-screen, even if the show hasn’t put them together all that sturdily. Yes, there’s her “Mad Queen” lineage; yes, there is the quite noxious suggestion that she scoured King’s Landing out of some emotional jag. More important, though, is the strategic principle that Dany has learned time and again: Fear works. Love has worked for her too, but as she pointed out to Jon, Westeros hasn’t exactly erupted in cries of “Mhysa!” since she arrived. If she’d more mercifully taken the capital, would the people have been swayed to her? Maybe. But Varys’s betrayal and all its implications—about all her supposed allies who spread the incendiary news of Jon’s parentage—gave her reason to think that she’d be a marked woman after even the gentlest of victories.

She cogently laid this thinking all out in her scenes with Jon and Tyrion, which had the crackling air of an impending storm. How striking to see this new Dany, styled not to look “mad” but rather just plainer and wearier. A dark clarity had settled over her. The scene of her executing Varys, on a visual basis alone, with her dragon materializing from the blackness behind her, is something that will populate a generation’s nightmares. The queen’s delivery elevated it further. In her calmest tones, Dany recited her titles and pronounced her sentence. She didn’t have to explain her reasoning. All assembled understood it.

On some nauseating level, after the shock wears off, they may come to understand—but never approve of—her reasoning for what came later. Whereas the Battle of Winterfell took a scenario that seemed apocalyptic and, somewhat cheaply, gave it a pat happy ending, the battle of King’s Landing really did torch expectations in the way that Game of Thrones is supposed to. We all know by now that George R. R. Martin loves to raid ancient and medieval history for its most horrifying tidbits, and that’s what happened here. The total obliteration of cities in war is a very real phenomenon with an obvious if vile logic. Alexander the Great crucified men on the beaches of Tyre after he conquered their city not only because he could; he did it to discourage other would-be resistors on his drive to dominate the world.

Dany—a registered crucifier herself—knows the power of intimidation. She believes that she’s just bought herself insurance against too much trouble from the rest of the Seven Kingdoms. Sure, Varys may have gotten a raven or two out with word of Jon’s claim to the throne. But now that Dany has demonstrated her absolutely terrifying weaponry and her willingness to use it on any and everyone, who in Westeros will dare to back another claimant? Not the “new prince of Dorne” and other unidentified vassals, I’d bet.

Well, okay, maybe all the confidants who’d pleaded with her to go easy on King’s Landing will turn. Their horror at her actions must be thick and rich. Jon had to stab his own soldiers to stop them from taking Dany’s cruelty as license to rape innocents. Arya witnessed the bloody cost of the razing firsthand; this, appropriately, seemed to reconnect her with the greater human race just after she made the choice to turn away from spending her life as a revenge-bot. Tyrion now surely realizes he made his gravest judgment error yet by turning in Varys. These characters could now find themselves in an oddly inverted and lonely position—set against their chosen queen at exactly the moment when the rest of the continent bows, tremblingly, to her.

What ever happened to breaking the wheel, you ask? Dany will argue that there’s no better way to do that than by melting what’s long been the seat of despotism. Her mercy, as she said, is to future generations who will supposedly thrive under her fair hand. Granted: That logic is megalomaniacal, monstrous, and exactly the justification any given tyrant uses. Varys, diagnosing her “destiny” talk in the last episode as just the raving of another would-be iron monarch, was absolutely correct. This is who she’s always been, it turns out, and who can say they didn’t at least suspect that could be the case?

In other ways, too, this episode brought into relief what’s been going on all along on this show. Dany’s choice ended up burying various optimistic assumptions of viewers while also paying off on characters’ long, tragic arcs. The Hound admitted to staking his life on vengeance before he unmasked his brother and took him down into fire. Jaime staggered back to Cersei to, as he always wanted, die in the arms of the woman he loved. Cersei in turn trembled at her ultimate fear—her own death—which indeed came to pass with her brother’s hands on her neck, as her dreaded prophecy foretold. Jon had to pick between his two great virtues, loyalty and honor, and in choosing the latter, it meant killing his own men and implicitly disobeying his queen.

The cinematic pyrotechnics to accompany this grim symphony were occasionally repetitious but overall extraordinary. We’ve seen dragon fire before, but not zigzags of it across the map of King’s Landing. We’ve seen hellacious slaughter before, but not from soldiers we’ve been trained to root for. We’ve seen battles and betrayals that burn the show down to its foundations, but arguably never as radically as this. Perhaps another turn is coming that will see green shoots coming up from the ashes. But if you think this has a happy ending, well, you know what Ramsay said.



This article contains spoilers through Season 8 Episode 5 of Game of Thrones.

In his A Song of Ice and Fire series, George R. R. Martin frames every chapter around the perspective of a single character. This strategy not only helps him build out his complex world, but also captures the conflicting, multifaceted interests of the story’s key players.

Cersei Lannister, despite being one of those key players, doesn’t receive a point-of-view chapter until A Feast for Crows, the fourth volume. In this first glimpse inside her head, which takes place during the funeral for her father, Tywin, her thoughts pinball wildly: She conjures insults she wishes she could direct at the attendees, expresses annoyance at having to mourn in front of the smallfolk, and dotes on her remaining son, Tommen—all topics anyone in Westeros would have assumed she’d be thinking.

But when she finally sees her father’s body, she ponders something not even Tywin would have guessed. “He had been a great man. I shall be greater,” she muses as she gazes at his corpse. “A thousand years from now, when the maesters write about this time, you shall be remembered only as Queen Cersei’s sire.” For three books, Cersei had been observed by others as a petty villain who put her family above all; this thought revealed just how far she actually wanted to climb on her own.

HBO’s adaptation has gone a different route. Until the end of Season 6, even without the luxury of peering inside the characters’ heads via point-of-view episodes or voiceovers, Cersei (played by Lena Headey) was a uniquely complicated villain, a vengeful royal with a drinking problem who struggled with doing her duty as the daughter of a great house. But in Seasons 7 and 8, she turned into little more than a one-dimensional monster who delighted in creatively torturing her enemies and allied herself with some of the show’s more flatly drawn characters.

And in her final appearance, Sunday night’s “The Bells,” she died buried beneath the Red Keep. Before she did, she pleaded with Jaime (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) to find a way out for them. “I want our baby to live,” she says. “I don’t want to die ... not like this.” After two seasons of spiritless, stereotypical villainy, Cersei finally revealed more of her character. It just came too late. As the Vox critic Todd VanDerWerff put it, Cersei “had long been the show’s best character, but it seemed to lose interest in her for this final stretch of episodes. … Her death—and, honestly, Jaime’s death—felt like an afterthought, like the show suddenly remembered it had all these characters left on the board and it might as well bump them off.”

Cersei, of course, is far from the only female character in Thrones’ final season to be underserved. The fourth episode’s writing for heroes such as Brienne of Tarth and Sansa Stark irked fans (including high-profile ones such as the actor Jessica Chastain and the director Ava DuVernay) and critics, who pointed out—as others have before—how Thrones, with its lack of female writers and directors, has always struggled with portraying women. Episode 5 only furthered that argument, as Daenerys (Emilia Clarke) burned enemies and innocents alike in King’s Landing, cementing her status as the overemotional female leader who must be stopped.

From the showrunners’ perspective, Cersei’s transformation can be traced back to the loss of all three of her children. “It was the one thing that really humanized her, you know—her love for her kids,” David Benioff said in HBO’s behind-the-scenes video for the Season 6 finale, in which Cersei indirectly caused the death of her youngest child. “As much of a monster as she could sometimes be, she was a mother who truly did love her children.”

The Thrones writers may have considered Cersei’s maternal instincts her one redeeming quality, but in the early seasons, she wasn’t just a doting mother; she was also a woman who’d constantly felt overlooked, who’d ached to wear armor instead of gowns, and who’d wanted to be respected as much as Tywin had been—maybe even more. In one of the best Lannister-centric scenes of Season 3, Cersei cowered when Tywin ordered her to marry Loras Tyrell. She even begged her father to consider reversing his command in a rare, human moment that contributed to her layered villainy.

And though no adaptation is expected to adhere exactly to its source material, the books had laid plenty of groundwork for Cersei to remain a nuanced character even if her children died. All her life, Cersei had been obsessed with a prophecy a witch had told her—a prophecy the show portrayed—that warned of her being cast down by “another, younger and more beautiful.” So she obsesses over her looks and her status. “Words cannot hurt me,” she thinks repeatedly in her final chapter in A Dance With Dragons. “I am beautiful, the most beautiful woman in all Westeros.” Sure, the mantra has the ring of vanity, but it also captures Cersei’s fear. The show could have pulled on that thread of vulnerability after Cersei ascended to the Iron Throne, especially when that “younger and more beautiful” dragon queen began heading for her, but it never did. (And: Would it really have been so hard for production to swap out Cersei’s pixie cut for a better wig?)

The show tapered off its exploration of Cersei’s difficult relationship with Jaime, too. The pair began as incestuous siblings and parents to the future king; by the beginning of the final season, they were estranged and their dynamic sidelined. Aside from Cersei’s shocked expression as Jaime walked away in the Season 7 finale, the show didn’t bother to dig into her feelings about her brother’s betrayal. Cersei’s right-hand man, Maester Qyburn (Anton Lesser), even ordered the sellsword Bronn (Jerome Flynn) to kill the Lannister brothers on her behalf in the Season 8 premiere—a cold-blooded move for a highly personal assassination order.

Rather than diving into these other facets of Cersei, the series saddled her in her final episodes with another pregnancy—a twist that once again served to reduce her to that familiar trope: the villain who happens to be a mother. Tyrion (Peter Dinklage) spelled the writers’ perspective out for viewers when he made his last-ditch appeal in “The Last of the Starks.” “You’re not a monster,” he told his sister as she glared down at him from the walls of King’s Landing. “You’ve always loved your children more than yourself.” Not content with explaining themselves in behind-the-scenes videos, the showrunners had one of the most clever characters in the series’ universe undermine his intellect and say it for them.

Would having more women writing and directing the series have saved Cersei from becoming so one-note? Maybe. Other prestige series such as The Affair and The Handmaid’s Tale, both of which have tackled the grief of child loss in major arcs without demonizing the mother, regularly count women in their writing and directing lineups.

Even within the violent world of Thrones, Cersei’s loss of her children needn’t have completely erased who she was. Other characters before her have outlived (or thought they’ve outlived) their children and grieved in compelling ways: Catelyn Stark (Michelle Fairley) learned of her younger sons’ supposed deaths while away from Winterfell and mourned their fates throughout Season 3. The Baratheon princess Shireen wasn’t Davos’s daughter, but she may as well have been: Her death still has lingering effects on him that have been revisited over the past two seasons. Even Daenerys got juicy scenes following her first dragon’s death in Season 7. Cersei, however? While Joffrey’s and Myrcella’s deaths left her reeling and contemplating loss, Tommen’s, at the end of Season 6, appeared to barely affect her, if only because she had a single scene—a look at Tommen’s body—to convey her grief.

The version of Cersei viewers saw in the time since her deadliest move—blowing up the Sept of Baelor—could have been so much richer. Lannisters always pay their debts. It’s too bad the show does not.



This story contains spoilers through Season 8, Episode 4 of Game of Thrones. 

An early scene in “The Last of the Starks,” the latest episode of Game of Thrones, finds Jon Snow giving a speech to the survivors of the Battle of Winterfell as the weary warriors prepare to burn the bodies of those who have fallen. “We’re here to say goodbye to our brothers and sisters, to our fathers and mothers—to our friends,” Jon says, projecting his voice so that it will echo over the orderly display of corpses. “Our fellow men and women who set aside their differences to fight together, and die together, so that others might live.”

He goes on from there: words that are inspiring, words that are necessary, words that form a eulogy in the collective. Jon’s speech evokes Gettysburg—Those who here gave their lives that that nation might live—and, in that, it announces the primary theme of “The Last of the Starks”: Maybe … it’s Jon. Maybe, after Game of Thrones spent seven seasons winnowing the field, the attrition pointing to a climactic contest between Dany and Cersei, a third-party candidate will swoop in at the last minute to change the game. “People are drawn to him,” Varys notes to Tyrion later in the episode, as the two kingmakers discuss the political matter of Jon’s charisma. And Tyrion, the hand of a different leader, cannot help but agree. The primaries may have been fought, and the conventions may have been settled, but Game of Thrones loves nothing more than a last-minute plot twist. Jon Snow 2020: When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die or, alternatively, you spend years not playing at all, only to find victory, in the final moments, placed gently in your lap.

Meanwhile, Daenerys. While Jon is speechifying, Dany—Queen of the Andals, the Rhoynar, and the First Men; Protector of the Realm; Queen of Meereen; Khaleesi of the Great Grass Sea; the Unburnt; the Breaker of Chains; the Mother of Dragons—is … watching him do it. The queen, rather than leading the grim ceremony, is simply another participant in it, listening to Jon’s speech, looking weary and sad and maybe just a little bit regretful that she had not, amid all the fighting, made some time to join Toastmasters.

It’s a remarkable shift. Game of Thrones, from the very beginning, has spun around the centrifugal idea that Dany, as queen/protector/khaleesi/breaker, is the rightful ruler of the Seven Kingdoms. She has been rightful according to the Westerosi notion of rightfulness, yes—she is the daughter of a ruler—but also according to the show’s conception of it: She is compassionate, the show has argued. She cares, deeply, about freedom. She has suffered, and conquered, and come out stronger for it on the other side. She still has learning to do, certainly, and flaws to overcome, definitely. But the show’s broad and twisting arc has implied that her mistakes have been, essentially, the means to an end: a wiser ruler. A broken wheel. A happy ending in a story that has so often declined to provide them. The show, over seven seasons, has been swathing its silver-haired heroine not only in drapey dresses and furry capes and sassy going-out tops, but also in an air of implied messianic liberation. The prince—or princess—that was promised.

But now: Twist! Jon is Aegon, and Aegon is a prince! Game of Thrones, particularly in its later seasons, has become almost comically reliant on the deus ex machina approach to storytelling: Time and again, its plot has been saved from itself by a well-timed tangle of convenience and magic. Now, as the show draws to a close, it seems to be applying that device to its founding political assumption. Maybe it’s been Jon. And maybe it should be Jon, finally. All the times the show questioned Daenerys’s capacities as a leader (the uprising in Meereen; her execution of Randyll and Dickon Tarly; her decision to fly Viserion into a skirmish with the Night King)? Those were not acknowledgments of the complications that will come when fragile humans are given immense power, the story is now suggesting; they were moments of foreshadow. Jon’s decency and charm, too, were heralds of what might come.

Game of Thrones’ eighth season airs into a fraught moment in America. The show might not have been intending, with its latest twist, to wade into the choppy waters of the electability debate, but here it is, nonetheless, navigating the currents. The show, now, is asking questions about what people finally want in their leaders—and how those desires might be constrained by tradition, and assumption, and failures of imagination. Jon may not be a particularly astute military leader. He may not be a terribly astute leader in general. He may be alive at the moment only because he has been saved from certain death multiple times, often by women. And he may have already bent the knee to Daenerys. Those are all things, the show is now suggesting, that will be weighed against another, perhaps overarching fact: He’s so charismatic! He’s so inspiring! He is precisely the kind of guy you’d want to have a beer with! (Or at the very least, some Dornish wine!)

And so Game of Thrones, a show that has spent years considering, with relative subtlety, broader questions about what constitutes effective leadership—questions about justice, and mercy, and strategy, and empathy—now seems to have settled on an answer: Leadership, it is currently suggesting, is a matter of fandom. The approach may try to justify itself in other terms—it’s not just that “people are drawn to him,” Varys tells Tyrion; it’s also that he is “temperate” and “measured” and a man (which “makes him more appealing to the lords of Westeros, whose support we are going to need”)—but the new rules have been set. They do not favor Dany.

“He comes back and keeps fighting!” Tormund, effusively drunk at the Winterfell wake, says of Jon. “Here, north of the wall, and then back here again! He keeps fighting. He keeps fighting! He climbed on a fucking dragon and fought! What kind of person climbs on a fucking dragon? A madman—or a king!”

The camera cuts to Daenerys. She looks dejected: She is the one, after all, who taught Jon the art of dragon riding. She is the one who has been engaging in that “kingly” activity for several seasons. She is the one who is, you know, the Mother of Dragons. And yet she is in a classic bind: To speak up and correct Tormund will make her seem petty. To advocate for herself will achieve, inevitably, precisely the opposite end. There’s nothing she can say, in that moment. And that, in its own way, speaks volumes.

In Dornish vino, veritas: Dany knows exactly what Tormund’s drunken enthusiasm for Jon portends. She knows that her path to the Iron Throne will now likely involve not merely a clash of militaries, but also a clash of personalities. You could read the new contest in theoretical terms—Jon’s populism versus Dany’s enlightened despotism; Jon’s aw-shucks affability versus Dany’s ambition—but “The Last of the Starks” suggested that it might finally come down to something much more basic: She is new, and he is familiar. She is complicated, and he is not. Daenerys Stormborn, Breaker of Chains, Mother of Dragons, understands what is true in the known world as well as in our own: When the contest is allowed to become a question of likability, the game is already rigged.



This story contains spoilers for the final season of Game of Thrones.

For many years, George R. R. Martin has been repeatedly asked the morbid question of what would happen if he were to die before finishing his A Song of Ice and Fire series. Since 1996, when the first entry, A Game of Thrones, was published, Martin has written five novels as well as several spin-off stories. But his progress has slowed to the point where HBO’s TV adaptation aired eight seasons and wrapped up its narrative before Martin has finished his penultimate work, the long-awaited The Winds of Winter. The huge success of HBO’s Game of Thrones brought more fans to Martin’s writing, which in turn has only added to the chorus of frustration about his creative pace.

“Fuck you.” That was Martin at his bluntest, back in 2014, when he was interviewed by a Swiss newspaper and asked about his hypothetical death. “I find that question pretty offensive, frankly, when people start speculating about my death and my health,” Martin, then 65 years old, said. “So fuck you to those people.” At other times, he’s been clear that he wouldn’t want some other writer to take over in his stead were he to die, which is how Robert Jordan’s famed The Wheel of Time series was eventually completed. “I don’t think my wife, if she survives me, will allow that either,” Martin has said. But in allowing HBO’s Game of Thrones to outstrip his novels, Martin has effectively let someone else finish his story for him. The question for book fans now is whether Martin will eventually unveil his own version.

Martin remains as resolute as ever: His ending is coming. In a post published on his blog Monday, he assured readers that work continues on The Winds of Winter, though he knows better than to set a deadline. And he noted how different his conclusion would be from that of the show, which only “had six hours for this final season. I expect these last two books of mine will fill 3,000 manuscript pages between them before I’m done.” He mentioned characters from his books who never even got introduced on-screen, and the resulting “butterfly effect” that would set his ending apart.

Still, the TV writers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss got to conclude Martin’s epic saga first by working off what Martin had told them about his presumed endgame. “We just sat down with him and literally went through every character,” Benioff said back in 2014. “I can give them the broad strokes of what I intend to write, but the details aren’t there yet,” Martin added. Whatever broad strokes he gave them translated into a final season in which one crucial character, Daenerys Targaryen, wreaked fiery chaos on the continent of Westeros; her lover and ally, Jon Snow, killed her in the aftermath; and, in a twist, the psychic seer Bran Stark became the new king.

To give an idea of just how removed the books are from the TV story lines, at the end of A Dance With Dragons (the latest entry, published in 2011), Jon has barely heard of Daenerys, Bran has only begun to amass the magical powers he demonstrated on the show, and Daenerys’s dragons haven’t yet come close to Westeros. Roose and Ramsay Bolton, villains who were dispatched in Game of Thrones’ sixth season, are still very much alive, as are major characters such as Stannis Baratheon and Margaery Tyrell, who also long ago died on the show. Tyrion Lannister, who spent the last three TV seasons wrestling with his allegiance to Daenerys, has yet to meet her in the novels.

In one way, this divergence speaks to a golden opportunity for Martin: Even if he trusted Benioff and Weiss with the broad strokes of his narrative arc, he can now gauge the public reaction to his biggest developments and adjust accordingly, producing a finale that still manages to surprise. Of course, it’s more likely that Martin’s struggle to wrap things up runs deeper than fan reactions to the show. A Song of Ice and Fire has always been lauded for its emphasis on detail and plausibility, for the tremendous craft Martin puts into setting up and foreshadowing every big development, and for the author’s continued skill at defying expectations. Indeed, some of the key points of HBO’s Game of Thrones finale—Daenerys dying, Bran becoming king—are the sort of against-the-grain ideas one can imagine Martin working toward.

For that to happen, his books will have to pick up the pace considerably; unfortunately, they’ve trended in the opposite direction for more than a decade. Martin initially planned his series as three books, before expanding his scope to six. Then his proposed fourth entry became so long that he split it into two, the first part published in 2005 and the second in 2011. He claims that only two novels are left on the docket—The Winds of Winter and A Dream of Spring—while also allowing that he’s “repeatedly been guilty of an excess of optimism.”

As a devoted fan of the books, I’ve found it painful to watch Benioff and Weiss try to interpret whatever Martin laid out for them as a coherent TV narrative. A Song of Ice and Fire is told from the perspective of dozens of characters, switching between their points of view for each chapter—an approach that might have helped sell a major moment such as Daenerys deciding to annihilate the city of King’s Landing. The show struggled to get viewers inside her head, just as it struggled to engage with frostier, conflicted characters such as Jon and Tyrion, relying on long, sometimes painfully direct monologues to explain shocking turns of events.

Martin’s recent comments on the end of the show suggest that the pressure is continuing to build for him. “I’ve had dark nights of the soul where I’ve pounded my head against the keyboard and said, ‘God, will I ever finish this? The show is going further and further forward and I’m falling further and further behind,’” he said in an interview in November. “I’m still deeply in it. I better live a long time, because I have a lot of work left to do,” he added in March. My desire as a reader is to see how Martin wraps everything up, a feeling that has been only amplified by my mixed reactions to the HBO show. The author still has the chance to end things on his own terms. But as time passes, that prospect feels more remote than ever.



Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers will be discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts in installments.

Spencer Kornhaber: Game of Thrones’ ending has apparently put David Benioff and D. B. Weiss in the wistful mind-set of a high-school-yearbook editor. How else to explain this premiere’s doling out of superlatives? Jon Snow called the late Ned Stark the “most honorable” man he ever met, which is awkward because Sam was telling him that Ned had lied all his life. Euron Greyjoy was named “most arrogant” by Cersei Lannister in the sole compliment she could muster after the Greyjoy pick-up artist asked for postcoital feedback. Arya titled Sansa the “smartest person,” and Sansa in turn said that Tyrion was formerly the cleverest person she ever knew. (He lost his honorific by believing a promise from Cersei, the least trustworthy person in this realm and any other.)

This premiere might not rack up many superlatives when all the Thrones episodes are accounted for, though. After a two-year gap and a dragon’s-feast worth of hype, fans probably wanted grand plot movements. Instead, they got a buffet of inevitabilities (Daenerys arriving in Winterfell; Jon learning of his parentage), some spooky but short set pieces (the SEAL Team Six–like rescue of Yara; the pinwheel of severed arms), and one long sequence of lighthearted dragon flying that evoked Harry Potter seeking a Snitch. Yet I’d argue that this was the best Thrones episode in a long time. After the disastrous Season 7 channel surfed between far-flung battlefields and contrived confrontations, Thrones looks to have re-centered itself in human relationships and a concrete time space.

The shift was announced in the new title sequence, which not only relit the Seven Kingdoms in a wintery palette, but hinted at a tweaked perspective. With the locations winnowed down to just the decimated Wall, Winterfell, and King’s Landing, and the newly introduced Northern outpost of Last Hearth, the camera swooped and pried into crypts and throne rooms. It’s okay to gasp: After eight years, Thrones’ opening credits could legitimately be called iconic, and to tinker so drastically is nearly in the lineage of the show’s actual plot twists. I found myself thrilled by getting to go inside the cuckoo clock, but mostly I was reassured by the underlying implication. After so many years of sprawl, Thrones now wants to go deep, not wide.

Which means that details matter more than ever. The kid scampering up a tree at the start of the hour made for a clear callback to Bran’s climbing in the series premiere (more yearbook-nostalgia feels!). But that callback also deepened the episode-closing shot of Bran locking eyes with Jaime Lannister, the man who pushed him out of a window all those years ago. Rounding out the motif of “Watch out, little boy” was young Ned Umber, who requested wagons for his people and was then sickeningly crucified by the undead. All of which felt like omens about Bran’s fate. When he told Jon that he’s “almost” a man, he was probably talking about his humanity. But he also, despite having the mind of an ancient being (and possibly the Night King?), is still just a kid.

That’s part of why it felt so shockingly heartwarming to see Jon plant a gentle kiss on the forehead of his long-lost brother early in the episode. This was the first in a line of tender moments between characters, many of whom were reunited for the first time in a long time. Jon and Arya shared a hearty hug; Jon and Sam were emotional about each other’s presence even before Sam dropped his 23andMe bombshell; Yara delivered Theon an affectionate skull crack. Most memorable were Arya’s encounters at the blacksmith’s. First, the Hound called her “a cold little bitch” in a way that sounded like a compliment. Then she met up with Gendry for an unmistakable bout of goth-teen flirting, confirming the important fan theory that she’s been thinking about his abs since Season 2.

Indeed, romance and sex ran throughout the episode. In what felt like another throwback to the show’s early days, Bronn partook of a gratuitous prostitute confab. After some of the least sentimental wooing imaginable, Euron coupled with Cersei. At Winterfell, Varys, Tyrion, and Davos played yentas and schemed to pair up Jon and Daenerys. Those two, of course, have been secretly dating since their cruise to White Harbor. Their dual dragon riding surely served the plot purpose of setting up future dogfighting sequences. But more importantly, it was the kind of glorious ham upon which any good screen romance must be built. Jon got a better version with Ygritte on top of the Wall, but still, there are signs of life to this intra-Targaryen couple. If there weren’t, why would Drogon be staring?

Now: As Jon made like Atreyu on Falkor, audience members may well have made like Bran and screamed at their screen, “We don’t have time for this!” But the best moments of Thrones—see: all the big deaths—have been enabled by the sturdiness of the connections between characters. Focusing on relationships ahead of what’s sure to be a bloody, fiery, snowy, casualty-laden slog is smart. It’s only through caring about these knights and lords as human beings that we might get a jolt when Bronn is told to assassinate his buddies Tyrion and Jaime. We need to believe in Jonerys Snogaryen in order to be wrenched by Jon’s face when he’s informed of his parentage, which is both a complication for his political mission and his romantic life. “Did you bend the knee to save the North, or because you love her?” Sansa asked him, but the answer of course can be Both. Or at least that might be what Jon hopes.

I’ll leave you two to unpack the loyalty drama among Jon, Sansa, and the lords of Winterfell. Bonus points for figuring out which zodiac sign or spin-class logo the White Walkers assembled out of arms on that wall.

David Sims: I’m all for callbacks as Game of Thrones kicks off its final season. Remember when summer felt eternal in Westeros, and Jaime had a different haircut, two hands, and a propensity for child murder? Bran sure does, and he is ready for a trip down memory lane. But another character who’s ready to relive some classic moments from the pilot episode is the Night King, who assembled that bloody arts-and-crafts project out of the short-lived little lord of House Umber for everyone to see. Of course, this isn’t his first dismemberment tableau. Remember that sojourn beyond the Wall, in the show’s very first scene? It featured a similarly ghastly arrangement of severed limbs. Whatever message the White Walkers are trying to send, it’s the same one they’ve been pressing for a long time.

It’s nice to know that even the mute ice zombies of Game of Thrones are ready for the show’s swan song. But to me, this episode’s shocking conclusion spoke to how much Benioff and Weiss have exhausted their bag of narrative tricks. “Winterfell” was, like every season premiere, a fine bit of table-setting that served as a helpful reminder of where every character is, so that the viewers can have their bearings when things start to get chaotic. But the end of the episode was a grim and portentous warning that the White Walkers are … still en route. After eight years, you’d think that memo had been well and fully received.

After all, why else would Jon have given up his crown for Daenerys, to the consternation of just about everyone in Winterfell? How else would Cersei be able to keep her grasp on King’s Landing without the armies of the North bearing down on her? Because of the zombies, as Jon kept having to remind everyone who kicked up a fuss with him upon his return. Nothing else matters until the zombies are dealt with. So yes, I did nod when Bran impatiently noted that there’s no time for romantic dragon-back getaways, given that there are just five episodes on the books after this one; Game of Thrones has always enjoyed a healthy windup before the big pitch, but I’m beyond ready for the big showdown.

Because it’s only after dealing with the White Walkers that Game of Thrones can actually dig into the knotty character dynamics that “Winterfell” laid out. Right now, Daenerys is little more than a vital cache of resources. When Sansa, Arya, or any of Winterfell’s lords and ladies (including the forever-flinty Lyanna Mormont) question why Jon gave up his kingship to follow her, he points to her big army and her even bigger dragons. But after (if?) the looming undead crisis is resolved, there are a lot of thornier questions to ask of this invading force and the long-term assistance it can provide to the people of Westeros.

I’m all for Game of Thrones questioning the heroics of Daenerys’s conquering wave. Sam was never a big fan of his bully of a father, but his reaction to the news of the Tarly family’s fiery execution was a necessary rejoinder to all the brutal spectacle of Season 7. In the aftermath of whatever battles are on the horizon this season, every ruler is going to have to reckon with the tough choices they made during the war, and Daenerys’s plan to rule through the might of her dragons isn’t going to sound like much of a change from the tyrannies of old. That’s why it’s fair for Sansa to ask Jon if he’s just doing this all for love. Because while that would go over like a stone with his liege lords, his connection to Daenerys might also be the only way to usher in a peaceful future for Westeros.

But these are all questions the show is just hinting at, and with so little time left on the clock, I was hoping for something more weighty than arched eyebrows from Cersei and Jon’s blank bafflement at the news that he’s having an affair with his aunt. The deep dive into every castle from these revamped opening credits was a surprising new piece of spectacle, but it just as tellingly lacked in new information. Yes, Winterfell has a heart tree; yes, King’s Landing is where the Iron Throne is. That’s been true for eight years now, and it’s time for Game of Thrones to push forward to something that feels genuinely revolutionary. Lenika, do you see brighter days on the horizon, or will the icy annihilation wave take most of our pals away before change arrives?

Lenika Cruz: As I peer into the future, I’m sorry to inform you that it looks a lot like that scene of Beric, the Hound, and Tormund creeping around the Last Hearth: extremely dark. (Like “pause the episode, get up to turn off all the lights, and then squint hard at the TV screen” dark.) Yes, David, you’re right that for the past eight years, the White Walkers have been on the exact same path. But a lot of revolutionary stuff has happened. It might have been two years since “The Dragon and the Wolf” (arguably the worst finale in the show’s history) for us, but the Wall came down like a week ago in Thrones time. If anything, this episode made me marvel at just how much has changed since this whole journey began, which is clearly what Benioff and Weiss intended to do before they knock down the next set of dominoes.

We’ve had ages to get used to the fact that Arya is no longer a little girl playing at being a swordsman; that Sansa no longer trusts men who promise to keep her safe; that Bran is now Westeros’s most powerful computer/psychic; that dragons exist. So I liked getting to briefly grapple with these transformations through the eyes of characters who were less familiar with these truths. There was Jon’s sad, knowing look after Arya admitted to having used Needle “once or twice.” And Tyrion’s pained expression after his former wife scoffed at him for trusting Cersei. And Jon’s bewildered stare when Bran said he’s “almost” a man. And, of course, the townsfolk’s terrified reaction when Drogon and Rhaegal tore screeching across the skies of Winterfell. As the Thrones map contracts and more characters find themselves bumping into one another on the way to the armory or while gazing poignantly over the courtyard, these details will matter even more, like Spencer said.

David, you note that “it’s only after dealing with the White Walkers that Game of Thrones can actually dig into the knotty character dynamics that ‘Winterfell’ laid out.” Right now, I’m more nervous about how these dynamics will affect the living’s ability to deal with the dead in the first place. Jon and Dany’s partnership is already weakening Winterfell’s position, with the Glovers holing up at Deepwood Motte and the Dothraki and Unsullied cutting into the castle’s meager provisions. Now the reveal that Jon Snow isn’t Jon Stark or Jon Sand or Jaehaerys but Aegon Targaryen VI, rightful heir to the Iron Throne, is going to undermine an alliance that hinges entirely on Jon’s unambiguous subordination to the Mother of Dragons.

“Winterfell” did just enough to establish Jon and Dany’s enduring, um, respect for each other while also hinting at the fragility of their collaboration. “Nothing lasts,” Varys intoned as he observed the lovebirds. Approximately at that moment, Dany was complaining to Jon about Sansa’s shady behavior toward her. “She doesn’t need to be my friend, but I am her queen. If she can’t respect me …” Dany said before trailing off, which forced me to wonder: What, is she going to try to burn Sansa next?! Later, Jon looked shocked when he learned that Dany had executed the Tarly men, and he seemed genuinely lost for words when Sam asked, “You gave up your crown to save your people. Would she do the same?” To which viewers across the world yelled, internally or otherwise, “Absolutely not!”

It’s been ages since Dany felt in any way like a real ruler of The People. This week, she spent virtually no time among the regular folks; she gave no inspiring speech to the Northern Lords about how she’s fighting for them in order to earn their trust and loyalty. I realize that she chose to let Jon do most of the talking and that she’s no longer trying to amass a following, but you’d think she could’ve summoned a little of that populist magic she demonstrated so long ago at Astapor, Yunkai, and Meereen. The last time she tried to talk to Westerosis about her profound desire to make the world a better place, she had to use her dragons to encourage people to bend the knee. If there’s anything that’ll wipe the forced politician smile off her face in the coming weeks, it’ll be the knowledge that someone else—even someone who’s as allergic to holding power as he is responsible at wielding it—might be her rightful king.

Lastly, I’m relieved we didn’t actually see the army of the dead this week, and that’s not only because my heart can’t take another scene of the Night King bobbing up and down on Viserion’s back. Those villains need to regain some of their mystique before the big battle arrives, and that horrific scene at the Last Hearth certainly helped (is it just me or did that awful flaming-child swastika look a little like the Targaryen sigil?). That scene also offered a useful update on the White Walkers’ progress south. The Umber stronghold is roughly a third of the way between The Wall and Winterfell, suggesting that the Night King could arrive around Episode 3 (also if episode running times are any indication, which they usually are).

There’s other stuff we didn’t really get into, like whether Cersei is going to try to pin Jaime’s baby on Euron (it seems I might have been wrong for assuming that she was only fake-pregnant last season), or whether Theon’s impending reunion with Bran will be as awkward as Bran’s impending reunion with Jaime. But we’ll have five more weeks to answer these questions and more. Until next time, I’ll be thinking about the Unsullied and Dothraki sleeping in those sad, cold, Fyre Festival–lite tents.



This story contains spoilers through Season 8, Episode 1 of Game of Thrones.

It was Sam who shared the news. Reeling from the discovery that Daenerys had summarily executed his father and brother after they had refused to pledge their loyalty to her, Game of Thrones’ resident intellectual finds Jon in the crypt of Winterfell, where the bodies are buried and the myths of the dead live on. Sam, his voice cracking with rage, relays the political consequences of his family’s tragedy: that the queen who has portrayed herself as an agent of justice might be, also, the opposite. Had Jon been in Daenerys’s position, Sam insists, pivoting to the reason he has sought Jon among the tombs, Jon would have prioritized mercy over vengeance. He has done that before, after all.

“I wasn’t a king,” Jon replies, rejecting Sam’s assessment.

“But you were,” Sam says. “You’ve always been.”

“I gave up my crown, Sam. I bent the knee. I’m not King in the North anymore.”

“I’m not talking about the King in the North. I’m talking about the king of the bloody Seven Kingdoms.”

If you, on your Game of Thrones final-season prediction ballot, had marked “In the very first episode” under “When does Jon find out about his true parentage?,” this was probably the point in Sunday’s Season 8 premiere when you began to do your gloating. Sam, in the flickering candlelight of the Stark family crypt, proceeds to explain what he knows to the man who both is and is not at all Jon Snow: the love between the children of rival houses; the kidnapping that wasn’t; the annulled marriage; the new marriage; the High Septon’s diary; the promise Ned made to his sister, as she lay dying; Bran, newly minted with magic, seeing it all in a vision. “Your mother was Lyanna Stark,” Sam tells his friend. “And your father—your real father—was Rhaegar Targaryen. You’ve never been a bastard. You’re Aegon Targaryen, true heir to the Iron Throne.”

This is the kind of revisionist history that has the power to change the future; Jon is Jon, however, and so, taking in the complicating truth, he focuses on the complicated lie. “My father was the most honorable man I ever met,” he tells Sam, glowering, his warm breath billowing against the chill of the crypt. “You’re saying he lied to me all my life?”

In one way, it’s a strange reaction to the news that Jon is, you know, king of the Andals and the First Men, sixth of his name, the nephew of his brand-new girlfriend, etc. For Jon, though, it’s entirely fitting. In a show that has found most of its primary players following sweeping arcs and undergoing major transformations, Jon’s circumstances have changed while his character, comparatively, has not: Jon was then, and is now, a Good Guy. He tells the truth, even when the truth in question is inconvenient, and this has been not only a reliable fact within an otherwise unsteady universe, but also an extension of his relationship to Ned. (Tyrion to Jon last season, when the latter’s blunt honesty nearly compromises the new allies’ ability to build a coalition to fight the encroaching White Walkers: “Have you ever considered learning how to lie, every now and then? Just a bit?” It’s a callback to the brand of honesty that ended up costing Ned, several seasons ago, his life.)

Sam’s news, in that sense, is a plot point that doubles as a crushing irony. Here is a character who has understood himself to be a teller of truths, learning that his whole existence has been, in some sense, a lie. And, coming as it does—within an episode that is mostly a series of scene-settings for future battles—the destabilizing discovery offers its own kind of resolution. Game of Thrones, after all, has long been interested in lies: as architectural facts, as ruptures that are capable of upending the social order. Lies, here, alter history. Joffrey, cruel and petty, lied about the attack on Mycah, and changed, with his selfishness, the path of everything that would follow. Cersei lied about joining the alliance to fight the Night King, and about so much else. Tyrion lied. Littlefinger lied. Arya lied.

The full consequences of those untruths—the macrocosmic results of the microcosmic manipulations—remain, as yet, unclear. But now, as the story’s end draws closer, here is another lie to add to the mix: Ned’s lie about Jon. Ned told this lie as a matter of honor—to fulfill his promise to his sister, and to protect a baby whose claim to the Iron Throne would put his life in mortal danger—but, as all lies will, it irreparably changed the course of things. The lie Ned told allowed for a different mistruth to take root among the weirwood trees: the myth that Rhaegar Targaryen had kidnapped Lyanna Stark. It was a misunderstanding that instigated an Iliad-esque cascade of rivalries, which escalated into wars and resolved into the great war that is soon to be fought. The tragedy lurking at the heart of the struggle that has steadily spread across the Known World isn’t merely the way lies can shift reality—that has been clear from the outset—but also the idea that simple confusion, solidified as myth, can do the same. The history books were wrong. The truths themselves had lied. And here is Jon Snow, the living embodiment of the mistake.

What will he do now? Will Jon-né-Aegon seek the throne that he never knew was his, and that he therefore never wanted? Will the not-wanting make him even more worthy of power? Will Aegon Targaryen, sixth of his name, fire and ice at once, challenge Daenerys—whose promises to break chains and wheels and systems of leadership might be, the show has repeatedly hinted, their own kind of lies? Or will the man who has lived as Jon Snow do the thing he has always done, honoring his own promises at all costs? What does “honor” mean at this point, now that the fuller truth has come to light?

Game of Thrones is part of a moment that is itself deeply concerned with those kinds of questions. The show, after all, is airing in an environment—its audiences’ own version of the Known World—that is itself being steadily shaped by lies. The leader who misleads with impunity, weaponizing lies as an easy means to uneasy ends. The system that allows him to do it, because the illusions often suit the purposes of the powerful. The wheel that, refusing to break, spins on through the dullness of inertia. The looming threat, totalizing and existential, dismissed as a fantasy; the war against it that will be fought with too few resources and insufficient conviction; the world that will be knocked off its axis by untruths molded into myths. Jon Snow, during the beginning of the end to Game of Thrones, learned that he is the rightful heir to a similar state of affairs. No wonder he understood that news as tragedy.



Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers will be discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts in installments.

David Sims: Last week’s episode of Game of Thrones was all about the human stakes of the conflict ahead, and the unlikely alliances and friendships that had been forged over the past seven seasons. “Winterfell” existed to build up serious dramatic tension ahead of the climactic clash with the Night King and his army of the dead. This week’s episode, titled “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” and written by series mainstay Bryan Cogman, served the exact same purpose. Set on the eve before battle, it saw almost all the show’s friendly characters gather at Winterfell to hash out old grievances, pursue long-simmering romances, and generally cast a wistful glance back at all the crazy circumstances that brought them together.

I’m not opposed to such a notion—Thrones has always been as much about the interpersonal dynamics as it is about the big-budget fights. I’d gently suggest, though, that perhaps audiences didn’t need most of last week’s dire episode, which suffered from molasses-slow pacing and an excess of interest in the Jon-Daenerys relationship (one of the least compelling bonds in the series, which exists only for plot purposes). Smoosh that episode together with this one, and you could distill from them a good hour of fan service. But with one-third of the season now spent, I can’t deny I’m eager for everyone to get to the fireworks factory already.

Cogman, who has served as the writing staff’s foremost expert on the deep lore of George R. R. Martin’s books, was best suited to tackle the action of this episode, which amounted to a bunch of meaningful fireside chats. Some characters who finally got to hash things out, like Jaime and Bran, essentially hadn’t interacted since the Game of Thrones pilot. Other long-awaited reunions—between Brienne and Tormund, or Sansa and Theon—had previously been interrupted by the usual Game of Thrones plot contrivances (war, subterfuge, throne-room politics).

The most vital and best-handled bit of “satisfying payoff”? When Davos Seaworth made a big pot of onion soup for everyone. Kidding. It was Jaime’s knighting of Brienne, which functioned partly as a way for him to try to repay her for the good she saw in him. The moment was also an acknowledgment of the ludicrousness of the chivalric traditions of Westeros, which had elevated him to godlike status while largely ignoring or marginalizing her. Jaime, even in his diminished state, is a legend walking into the halls of Winterfell at the beginning of the episode, his notoriety built up in a world that is likely going to be swept aside in the coming weeks. In knighting Brienne, he not only acknowledged his obvious love for her, but also nodded at a potentially bright future if everyone can make it through this darkest night.

The “fireplace club” (which also included great characters like Tyrion, Tormund, Davos, and Podrick) was a nice assemblage of Game of Thrones’ reliable middle-management workhorses—politicians and brawlers alike who have made their mistakes and scored a few big triumphs, and who will all soon be tossed into the blender by the Night King (and whatever battle for the throne follows). As Thrones wraps up, I’m always going to be happy to hear war stories from the personalities I’ve enjoyed the most over the years.

Some of the other reunions I could take or leave. Arya’s motivations in scoring one hot night with Gendry before the big fight were perfectly understandable, but the scene was awkwardly presented. It was one of a few that felt like it had sprung from the pages of fan fiction rather than Martin’s novels. As the show has progressed beyond the Song of Ice and Fire series, certain plot developments have felt annoyingly neat, and this was one of them—as was Arya’s cold goodbye to the Hound, or Sam’s presentation of a Valyrian steel blade to Jorah.

I’m all for Thrones celebrating the quieter moments. But there were times during “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” when I felt the show running down a checklist and making sure it spent a little time on everything before getting ready to kill off a bunch of main characters. Next week’s edition should finally settle the dust on the situation at Winterfell and start zooming back out to consider Westeros at large. But Lenika and Spencer, I ask you: Has the show left itself enough time to dig into what comes next?

Lenika Cruz: I hate that I’m thinking about this season in such a clinical way, but it does seem as if the showrunners have split these six episodes between “the lead up to The Big Battle” and “the aftermath.” Which makes sense! But I’m still not confident about what shape this aftermath will take; and that framing sort of assumes that the dead will be “dealt with” as of the end of Episode 3. (As Bran put it, “How do you know there is an afterwards?”) Nothing has genuinely surprised me so far this season as the show continues its table-setting, so I’m hoping that next week offers a development that feels somewhat paradigm-shifting or subversive.

“A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” was an entire episode dedicated to the “eve before the fight,” something that in the past Thrones had simply squeezed into the battle episodes themselves. Throughout the show’s run, these night-before scenes have featured some poignant mix of dark humor (remember Ser Davos’s lovely habit of anxiety-pooping the night before a fight), quiet horror (Cersei cooly informing Sansa about the wartime tradition of mass rape as they cowered in the Red Keep), and mundane logistics management. Characters tend to grapple with the tension between needing to accept the very real possibility of death and needing to hope that there might be an “after” to look forward to. Of course, the Battles of the Green Fork, Blackwater, Castle Black, and Bastards are nothing compared to next week’s clash, the stakes of which feel impossible to comprehend.

This episode, for all its loose-end-tying and fireside banter, tried to give some narrative structure to the impending Battle of Winterfell, perhaps realizing that the living versus the dead may be an epic premise, but also a vague one. The objective, as decided by a rather crowded war room, isn’t to play a numbers game and pray, but to target the Night King. If he falls, presumably, the whole nightmare will be over and the North will just have to clean up a bunch of leathery corpses for a few months. Really, it’s a dual mission: Kill the Night King and protect Bran. The former for obvious reasons (I’m rooting for Jaime to reprise his role as Kingslayer), and the latter because he’s a Stark and we like him (even if he’s prone to random pronouncements and eerie staring) and because he is the literal embodiment of the world’s history. “He wants to erase this world, and I am its memory,” Bran explained of the Night King. “That’s what death is, isn’t it?” Samwell offered, clearly having thought this through already. “Forgetting. Being forgotten … If we forget where we’ve been, what we’ve done, we’re not men anymore. Just animals.” Grander stakes: established.

I know a lot of people found plenty to love in this episode, and there were definitely some moments that made me emotional (Ser Brienne’s smile shone as brightly as the sun glinting off the sapphire waters of Tarth). But I wish “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” had dug a little more into the existential terror that characters must be feeling in concrete or insightful ways. I get that the prospect of dying is always going to be abstract, but the fate awaiting everyone now is qualitatively different from the kind of death facing the soldiers at the Blackwater or even in the Lannister loot train. When people died then—whether by wildfire or by dragonfire—that was it. This time, they’re contemplating not only dying but also having their bodies reanimated and possibly being used to murder everyone they love.

Maybe no one—outside of Jon and Sam and those who’ve already seen the wights—wants to think too hard about the details. But if we were going to have a quieter, dialogue-heavy episode, I could have used conversations filled with more curiosity or reflectiveness about the particular nature of the looming threat. Instead, we got Arya asking Gendry, “What are they like?” and him replying, “Bad. Really bad.” He elaborated: “Death. That’s what they’re like.” (There was a little bit of lampshading with Arya making fun of Gendry’s terrible answer, but she moved on quickly to flirting-via-dagger-throwing.) More broadly, we got the usual proclamations of “We’re all going to die!” and general references to being ripped apart by zombies.

The episode, to be fair, offered other meaningful exchanges that should make next week’s cavalcade of death harder to stomach and that helped foreshadow who might say goodbye. (I am sorry to report that Grey Worm will probably never see the beaches of Naath with Missandei.) And I appreciated the show’s efforts to pump the brakes a little on the post-battle, political table-setting in favor of revisiting the personal relationships. This is, after all, the last time that many characters will ever see one another off a battlefield. It’s also entirely possible that I’ll feel more warmly about “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” during future rewatches, after learning what devastation lies ahead.

How did this episode work for you, Spencer? Did it do enough to prepare you for the Battle of Helm’s Deep, part two? Are you as concerned as I am about the idea of stowing women and children in the crypt with a bunch of dead bodies when a zombie king with reanimation powers is on his way?

Spencer Kornhaber: I am concerned about the crypt, but I’m also perversely looking forward to a few of these suddenly sentimental characters turning spooky again. Thrones viewers used to be able to brag that this series offered something far richer than “good guys” and “bad guys,” valiant knights and wicked monsters, and so on. But after eight seasons of shaking up the conventional brew, the ingredients have settled, and here we are with more than a dozen über-sympathetic heroes, all rising to the top. Or, rather, to the North.

“A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” toured what might seem like a rogue’s gallery: holy men and drunks, princesses and commoners, tiny children and grizzled milk-swilling giants. Each character has undertaken some unlikely journey to arrive on the front lines of the fight to save the world. And yet somehow these diverse elements have recongealed into a samey goo. No one evinced knotty inner struggles or considered bolting before the dead arrive. Each conflict that arose evaporated just as quickly. When Jaime arrived at Winterfell, Dany understandably feared he might be there to cut her throat. The audience really didn’t fear that, though. They know the show is done with intrigue for now, which perhaps explains why Varys has stopped having lines.

Thrones is also apparently done mounting scenes that are riveting in their own right, rather than ones that just cash in on years of pent-up audience desires. Did any of this episode’s farewells and cuddle piles subvert expectations? Were any relationships further deepened? Were our understandings of characters made more complex? Okay, Podrick as a potential winner of Westerosi Idol was a twist. But Tormund Giantsbane just got more giants-baney, explaining his name and glugging out of a horn. The Brienne-Jaime interactions ratified a relational shift that happened long ago. Tyrion rued his mistakes, rued that his whoring days are behind him, and rued the memory of his father, which is to say, he just rued the obvious.

Even scenes that existed to amp tension felt remedial. It’s nice to see Dany try to use sweetness and solidarity to get Sansa on her side, but the dragon queen appeared bizarrely unprepared to address what both parties knew was the real impasse in their relationship: northern independence. Then there was Jon revealing his parentage to Dany at precisely the least opportune moment, and without offering any hint on whether he’d pursue his claim to the Iron Throne. Granted, there might not be any appropriate moment for such talk during an all-nighter before what could turn out to be an Endless Night. So maybe just stow it for now?

Arya and Gendry’s shack-up is sure to spark a ton of conversation, but that development too came off like a sop to fans’ bingo cards and betting pools. In our own world, Arya’s age being unspecified makes this a queasy coupling; given the circumstances in Westeros, you can understand it as not all that weird. The problem is that the show hasn’t done anything to reconcile the former fact with the latter, which is to say, it hasn’t gotten the viewer near being able to interpret what’s happening. Gendry, from everything he’s said, basically perceives her as a little girl. Arya has given almost no indication of sexual curiosity over these past eight years. The show seems caught between playing this pairing as cute and gross. It’s hard to trust that it knows what it’s doing.

It’s also hard to trust that Dany’s generals do. When the powers at Winterfell gathered over a map to formulate their battle plan, they engaged not in prickly deliberation but rather a game of “first thought, best thought.” Bran declared by fiat that he’d plant his trap in the Godswood. Theon landed the gig of guarding him, even though Theon would seem the last person anyone in Winterfell might trust with any important job, much less the task of securing all of humankind. No one fretted about how to prevent a White Walker from shish-kebabbing another dragon. And yes, Lenika, the crypt would seem to be a dicey sort of safe zone when the enemy can reanimate the dead.

Then again, let the hordes come. It’s time for some gnarly, insurmountable obstacles to again face these ragtag do-gooders who, after years of double-crosses and reversals, are hardening back into clichés. That the battle on the horizon will upend the heroes’ plans is a given. That many beloved characters will fall seems sure. But the scariest implication of this episode is that Thrones might execute its grandest showdown without the zings of surprise, imagination, and bald-eunuch machinations that once made it great.



This article contains spoilers for the series finale of Game of Thrones.

It went, roughly, like this: The queen who had presented herself as a reformer and savior revealed herself to be, in the final countdown, the opposite. Airborne and seated on her dragon, Daenerys looked down at the populace of King’s Landing, at all those people caught in the crosshairs of others’ political struggles. She heard the bells, their clangs making clear that the city had surrendered. She gave a snarl of rage, and then, acting either on a cruel whim or on a cruel martial assessment—Daenerys’s thought process in that moment was one of many mysteries this season that the Game of Thrones’ writers kept gallingly vague—she opened fire. The queen wielded her weapon, and the people below her burned.

That was “The Bells,” the penultimate episode of Game of Thrones. Sunday’s series finale, “The Iron Throne,” begins with some of the few survivors of Daenerys’s decision—Arya, Jon, Davos—surveying its aftermath. They see rubble. Ash. A mother and child, their bodies frozen in a charred embrace. Fast-forward to slightly later in the episode, however, and there is a decidedly new feeling in town. The most iconic structures of King’s Landing have been rebuilt by the labor of hands unknown. A new king has been installed to rule the now–Six Kingdoms, via an ad hoc collective that’s a little bit Great Council and a little bit prom committee. That king’s advisers, in their first meeting, are rearranging furniture and making jokes. The whole thing has the feel of a sitcom, my colleague Spencer Kornhaber noted, and there is, in particular, a strangely Seinfeld-ian quality to this latest plot twist—a show about knowing nothing and being nothing ending as a show that is about, simply, nothing. What’s the deal with plumbing?

Which is another way of saying that what happened in “The Bells” was a profound outrage, and that what followed in “The Iron Throne” was, in many ways … the opposite. Especially as things sped along to their conclusion, the episode’s events suggested that while, yes, horrifying things occurred in the very recent past, we must not dwell on them. Anger is ugly and undignified and not the proper emotion upon which to close out a long and popular piece of pop culture.

Game of Thrones was compelling in the first place because, in addition to its intriguing geopolitics—Guns, Germs, and Valyrian Steel—it also thought relatively deeply about questions that have preoccupied writers of constitutions and shapers of political systems for centuries: what happens when fallible humans, with their thirst for power and their capacity for pettiness, are asked to govern over other people. As the series went on, though, it became more mistrustful of emotion—and of rage, above all. Dany is angry, and that, the implication goes, helps to explain her descent into tyranny. Cersei is angry, and that leads her to a series of political miscalculations. Jon, meanwhile, who has a nearly bottomless capacity for sadness but seems constitutionally incapable of rage? The show has long treated his easy equanimity, even more than his royal bloodline, as the reason he might be worthy of the throne.

The Seinfeld-ian turn of Game of Thrones reflects that discomfort with anger. The lols of that first small council meeting are in one way about fan service, certainly—“any more,” Davos corrects Bronn, when the latter makes a reference to “no more coin,” calling back to his much-loved grammar burn from Season 7—but the yuks also perform a more broadly ritualistic function. They are meant, as Game of Thrones’ story comes to its conclusion, to cleanse that story of its sins. They are meant to suggest that the horrors of the past are of the past. And that we, the viewers, should move on just as these characters seem to have done. Gallows humor, with a Campbellian spin.

That insistence is there in the characters who make jokes; it is equally present in the character who seems at this point incapable of humor. Bran is the new king. Bran, who ostensibly saw what would happen and did nothing to stop it. Bran, who swept in at the end, assuring all involved that the tragedy they had just survived was a matter of destiny. “You were exactly where you were supposed to be,” he tells a guilt-ridden Jon in the monotone we are meant to assume is evidence of transcendent wisdom. The unavoidable implication, of course, is that all the other yous were exactly where they were supposed to be, as well. The innocent people of King’s Landing—the mother, her daughter, the many other mothers and daughters and fathers and sons whose lives were relegated to the show’s margins—were not in the wrong place at the wrong time when Dany arrived with Drogon. Fate had a different plan for them. They were the sacrifice, Bran is implying, that was made to the show’s cruel and fickle gods.

You could read that another way, as well—that Bran couldn’t have intervened, or that his lack of intervention perhaps saved more innocent lives, in the end—and that is because the show never fully bothers to explain Bran’s powers or their limitations. Bran is Chekhov’s warg, basically, which makes his arc one more thing that Game of Thrones has left insufficiently explained during its run, but which also speaks to a kind of moral laziness. Game of Thrones, in elevating Bran—and in framing his elevation as a happy ending—is making essentially the same argument that Daenerys did when she insisted to Jon that her dragonian draconianism was justified in the grand scheme of things: Some people in Westeros, nameless and faceless to us if not to those who knew them, had to perish so that a better world might come into existence. They died so that the Six Kingdoms might live.

We are not meant to do much questioning about the moral calculus of any of this. The show moves on to become a Seinfeld-ian buddy comedy in part to telegraph that. It makes Bran the effective winner of its “game”—and treats his new reign as a victory—to telegraph that. You might still be horrified about the charred bodies and the nameless victims—but, the show suggests, do not fret. Things are better now. We know that because characters who survived the Battle of Winterfell and the genocide of King’s Landing are now making jokes about brothels.

Anger is the emotion of oppression. It is the emotion of those who chafe against injustice. It is the emotion of the many, many people, in Westeros and beyond, who cannot afford to treat the game of thrones as merely a game. Game of Thrones has had, in the final estimation, a terrible relationship with its (extremely few) characters of color, and a deeply fraught relationship with its women, and here is one more way that its failures are plain: The show puts those characters in situations in which rage is the only reasonable response and then doesn’t know what to do with their anger. It takes Sansa’s rage and then stifles it by deciding that she must be grateful to have been raped and abused. It takes Brienne’s rage and assumes she’ll put it to use as an editor of Jaime’s Wikipedia page. It takes Grey Worm’s rage and uses it as a plot device to return Jon to Castle Black. It takes the Dothrakis’ rage, and … forgets about it entirely. Game of Thrones likes to talk about broken wheels, but in the end, it mistrusts the human emotion that has been, in our own universe as well as in the known world, most directly responsible for doing the breaking. It sees anger from the perspective of the entrenched and the powerful: as an inconvenience. As a threat. As a justification for paternalism. If chaos is a ladder, the ability to situate oneself above the fray is a profound privilege.

Which brings us back, circularities being what they are, to Bran. You could read his instatement as evidence that he has been evil the whole time, plotting it all; you could read it, too, as confirmation that his particular role in the massacre of King’s Landing—his complacency, his complicity, his apparent decision to let destiny takes its course—will go not merely unpunished, but in fact rewarded. You could read it as a failure of imagination, since Bran, though “elected” by a committee, is also just what the rulers of Westeros have long been: white and male and in possession of the correct chromosomes. (In the end, no wheels were harmed in the making of this show.) What the Bran-as-ruler development mostly is, though, is Game of Thrones’ final rebuke of anger: Bran’s apparent inability to feel emotion—anger, joy, empathy, anything at all, it would seem—is treated, ultimately, as a gift to the citizens of Westeros. To be outraged is to be compromised, suggests the show that has so often failed the angry and the marginalized; wisdom is what happens when, surveying the horrors all around you, you are capable of looking away.

This is a profound misreading—not only of the complexity of the human psyche, but also of the whole of human history. It is also a misreading of the show’s particular moment. Game of Thrones is airing into a political environment that is renegotiating the role that anger—and emotions more broadly—plays in political life. The day before “The Iron Throne” premiered in the United States, Joe Biden, a Democratic presidential contender and an espouser of the notion that the wheel is fine as it is, gave a speech. “Some say Democrats don’t want to hear about unity,” Biden said. “That they are angry—and the angrier you are, the better. That’s what they are saying you have to do to win the Democratic nomination. Well, I don’t believe it. I believe Democrats want to unify this nation. That’s what we’ve always been about. Unity.” Togetherness is a nice thought. Unity is a lovely idea. It’s easy for Biden—just as it appears to have been easy for D. B. Weiss and David Benioff—to dismiss anger as self-indulgent and inconvenient and dangerous. It’s easy for others to do the same. Outrage is easy to belittle—until, that is, the sky breaks open and the fire rains down and the anger becomes inevitable.



There’s a whiff of topicality to the premise of Booksmart, given the mounting scandals around elite-college admissions of late. Olivia Wilde’s new comedy follows the high-school pals Amy (played by Kaitlyn Dever) and Molly (Beanie Feldstein), who’ve stayed out of trouble for their entire academic career so that they could get into the best colleges. But when graduation week rolls around, Amy and Molly discover that all their hard-partying peers got into the same big-name institutions as them, so the girls resolve to have as much fun as they can before summer arrives. What better reason to cut loose than realizing the whole system is broken?

Booksmart, Wilde’s directorial debut, is firmly planted in the “one crazy night” subgenre of the teen-film canon. It owes a debt to generational classics such as American Graffiti, Dazed and Confused, Can’t Hardly Wait, and Superbad—movies about high schoolers running wild as they edge up to adulthood and obsess over the specter of an uncertain future. A blazingly funny and energetic romp, Booksmart seems destined for instant cult status, retaining the adolescent anxieties of its forebears while updating its worldview for the weary ranks of Generation Z.

Wilde seems eager to dispense with many teen-comedy tropes about social castes, mean girls, and relentless superficiality. The hyper-connected cool kids of Booksmart are largely well meaning, if easily bored; in staying away from that scene, Amy and Molly haven’t made themselves unpopular so much as they’ve remained unknown. They resolve to fix that in a single night by bouncing from party to party in search of the crazy high-school stories they once assiduously avoided. What they encounter puts a strain on their own tight bond, the thing that’s kept them safe but in a bit of a bubble over the years.

For Booksmart to work, the chemistry between the more introverted Amy and the hyper-opinionated Molly needed to be palpable, and fortunately it is. Feldstein (who made such an impression in a supporting role in Lady Bird) plays Molly as that special kind of teenager cursed with believing that every decision she makes is the right one—she’s full of righteous energy no matter how low the stakes. Feldstein’s force of personality is balanced out by Dever, who’s a phenomenal scene partner, someone who can convey whatever her character is bottling up with a slight stammer or awkward glance. Dever has been an actor to watch since her recurring role on the dearly departed TV series Justified, but Booksmart should cement her reputation as one of the biggest young talents in Hollywood.

The film is credited to four screenwriters—the script bounced around Hollywood for years and was revised multiple times. As such, it has an episodic feel, jumping from tone to tone, location to location. Sometimes it’s anarchically funny or surreal; at other times it’s quieter and more heartfelt. Wilde doesn’t shy away from the dizzying feel of her story, smashing through moments of calm with a funny set piece or heated argument, and leaning on her bright ensemble. Standouts include Noah Galvin as an imperious theater student; Billie Lourd as a mysterious party girl; and best of all, Skyler Gisondo as a well-meaning rich kid, equal parts grating and pathetic, who tries to buy his classmates’ attention.

Nobody is an out-and-out villain. There are no menaces chasing our heroes around in Booksmart, no archrivals trying to sabotage Molly and Amy’s fun. Even the more intimidating cool kids, such as the supposed bully Hope (Diana Silvers), are given scenes that go beyond stereotype. The greatest challenge facing the film’s central pair isn’t their peers; it’s that they have to figure out how to let their relationship evolve outside of the confines of high school. Wilde is fundamentally telling a story about young people trying to survive and enjoy life while the outside world, and all its terrifying realities, draws ever closer.

Booksmart has a bracing sexual frankness, and the film is appreciably nonchalant about Amy’s status as an out lesbian, albeit one who’s still working up the courage to ask her crush out on a date. But the romantic drama is peripheral. The movie triumphs because of its emphasis on the intensity of teen friendship, all the power Molly and Amy have drawn from each other, and their anxieties about how life will go on after they part ways. Booksmart doesn’t have an answer for how they can best face the future together, even as the resolute Molly insists that there’s a solution for everything. The film is simply intent on capturing the energy of that special “us against the world” connection that can exist only in high school and unleashing it onto the screen.



In 2002, the BBC premiered a three-part adaptation of Sarah Waters’s novel Tipping the Velvet, the rare show that managed to transcend the feverish, tabloid-stoked anticipation of its transgressive elements. Billed as the most explicit lesbian drama in British television history, Tipping the Velvet told the story of a Whitstable oyster girl, Nan (Rachael Stirling), who falls in love with a male impersonator, Kitty (Keeley Hawes), and ends up embroiled in a Victorian subculture of sapphism and exploitation. Compared with how abjectly the miniseries was hyped (“Scenes in the drama involve crude sex toys, swearing and sex acts,” the Daily Mail gasped), what actually aired was a playful, poignant coming-of-age story about sexuality hiding in plain sight. Tipping, Waters wrote in 2018, was itself exploited for the purposes of titillation, and yet the fact that it was adapted at all was close to miraculous, given the dearth of lesbian stories in mainstream culture.

A lot has changed since 2002, which is maybe why HBO’s new eight-part drama Gentleman Jack, co-produced with the BBC, feels like such an oddity. Unlike Tipping the Velvet, which was fiction—an effort to forge space for queerness in a time and a literary landscape where it almost never exposed itself—Gentleman Jack is based on the diaries of a real woman, a landowner and an industrialist named Anne Lister who had what’s often interpreted as Britain’s first lesbian marriage. Born in 1791 in the north of England, Lister dressed in masculine clothing, and chronicled her romantic and sexual relationships with women in her diaries, the most scandalous entries of which were written in a code of her own invention. In 1834, she participated in a commitment ceremony with Ann Walker, another woman of independent wealth, and the two lived and traveled together until Lister’s death.

Lister is an extraordinary character—a woman who found ways to thwart every restriction that society imposed upon her. Forbidden to attend university, she pursued independent medical study with a surgeon in Paris. Banned from loving freely, she conducted romantic relationships with women as brazenly as she dared, although the coded nature of her diary conveys her awareness of the stakes of discovery. Those stakes, though, are largely absent from Gentleman Jack, an arch, jaunty series in which Lister only seems to win. Played with entrancing charisma and poise by Suranne Jones, Lister is a strange kind of anachronism, a wry 19th-century boss with breezy fearlessness and Fleabag-esque asides to the camera. “I’m always all right,” she tells a character in one scene, and the odd thing is that she is—barring some minor pangs of heartbreak and one violent altercation, Jones’s Lister is unsinkable in both spirits and status.

In theory, Lister’s indomitability makes her the perfect candidate for dramatization. In practice, though, something’s missing. How can a character be bold and transgressive when so few obstacles seem to be in the way of her desires? Gentleman Jack is adapted by Sally Wainwright, the superb British screenwriter behind Happy Valley and To Walk Invisible, a two-hour drama about the lives of the Brontë sisters. What tends to tie her work together is a setting (the northern English county of Yorkshire), and a commitment to writing strong, nonconformist female characters. With Lister’s diaries, which were decoded and published starting in 1988, Wainwright has intimate access to Lister’s mind. And yet something gets lost in translation. As written in Gentleman Jack, Lister is a modern HBO heroine transposed into a conventional costume drama, ambitious and dynamic and protected by privilege.

In part, this is a tonal problem and a structural one. There’s no earthly reason for Gentleman Jack to be stretched out over eight episodes, given that its heroine finds her soulmate in Episode 1 and then has to distract herself for seven more hours with a subplot about a coal mine and a vague mystery about a reckless horse rider. The series embraces all the trappings of late-’90s period dramas, meaning that there are infinite shots of opulently wallpapered drawing rooms and characters stepping out of carriages. Every time Lister walks anywhere, which she does frequently, the camera captures her furiously pacing through cobbled streets or past pigsties to brisk musical accompaniment (the score, like the opening credits of corsets being laced and buttons being fastened, feels gauche and retro).

Rather than focus on the heartbreaks and betrayals of Lister’s early romantic experiences, Wainwright writes Lister as a consummate seducer in midlife, a debonair rake who pursues women intently. After a single tea with the wealthy and depressed Ann Walker (Sophie Rundle), Lister resolves to stay in Shibden and “endeavor to make wealthy little Miss Walker my wife,” a mission that’s written almost as a kind of grooming. First, Lister spends hours talking with Walker. Then she touches her, clutching her hand and moving closer to her on the sofa. Finally, she asks provocative questions that sexualize their dynamic. Gentleman Jack mostly shies away from explicit love scenes, but an early conversation between Lister and Walker has a charged energy for all its chasteness: As the intimacy between the two characters grows, the camera moves closer and closer into their faces, until their mouths and eyes seem to occupy the whole of the screen.

Gentleman Jack presents Lister as someone who achieved uncommon goals through force of personality alone. She simply decides to set up a coal mine, or to marry Walker—both impossible feats for women in the 1830s—and then makes it so. There are a handful of scenes in which male characters underestimate Lister because she’s a woman, but they’re quickly shown up for their idiocy. Moreover, by the time viewers meet Lister at the beginning of the series, she’s in her early 40s and has no hesitation whatsoever about who she is. “I love, and only love, the fairer sex,” she tells Walker. “These feelings haven’t deviated or wavered since childhood. I was born like this, and I act as my God-given nature dictates.”

These scenes have an empowering quality to them and a sense of uplift. But it’s hard to craft a drama around a person who seems to be invulnerable. Lister’s family appears to accept her sexual orientation without protest; her servants raise genteel eyebrows at her overnight visitors but squash any local gossip. As a landowner and a landlord, she’s insulated by the fact that there are more farmers requiring her land than there are acres to rent to them. Unlike, say, Tipping the Velvet, which had an acute grasp not only of the real danger of exposure but also of the socioeconomic inequality of Victorian England, Gentleman Jack girds itself with a more positive, palatable attitude. The pity is that Anne Lister, a truly audacious, difficult, and groundbreaking woman, ends up with a biographical portrait that’s anything but.



Late in a blowout win over the Washington Wizards back in February, Giannis Antetokounmpo of the Milwaukee Bucks snatched an opposing player’s dribble and sprinted the other way. Fans of the 24-year-old MVP front-runner knew what to expect next. Antetokounmpo spanned the court in just a few long strides, sidestepped the last unlucky defender between him and the rim, leapt and stretched out his 6-foot-11-inch, 242-pound frame (with its 7-foot-3-inch wingspan), and drummed home a one-handed dunk. The sequence belongs to that slightly disorienting category of athletic accomplishments only the NBA’s best players have access to. It was spectacular—a merging of reflex, strategic intuition, quickness, and power into five unimprovable seconds. But it was also familiar, verging on routine. Bucks season-ticket holders see something like it from Antetokounmpo probably 50 times a year.





What wasn’t familiar was Antetokounmpo’s reaction. “I’m the fucking MVP!” cameras caught him yelling as he stomped toward the courtside seats, flexing and thumping his chest. Over his six seasons, the native of Greece has earned a reputation for humility. He talks regularly about all he has left to learn, having come to the sport at the relatively late age of 12. He engages fans with such warmth that it sometimes moves them to tears. But however uncharacteristic, the celebration seemed to capture something important about the story of this season, in which Antetokounmpo has staked out a place near the top of the NBA hierarchy, and Milwaukee has opened the playoffs as the favorite to reach the Finals out of the Eastern Conference. In years past, despite climbing stats and All-Star accolades, Antetokounmpo remained a figure of potential. This year, he and the Bucks have announced that they’re ready to make good on it.

When Mike Budenholzer was introduced as Milwaukee’s new head coach in May, he spoke of Antetokounmpo with excitement and relief. “It was miserable coaching against him, and I’m so happy to be saying, ‘34’s on my team?’” Budenholzer gushed. “That’s, like, really cool.” Antetokounmpo was coming off his second straight All-NBA season, but the Bucks had sputtered down the stretch and lost to an undermanned Boston team in the playoffs’ first round. The Milwaukee brass had fired the former coach, Jason Kidd, in January, and the hiring of Budenholzer, the 2015 Coach of the Year with the Atlanta Hawks, signaled a belief that there was room for more substantial growth.

The Bucks’ management had perhaps taken a lesson from recent NBA history. Every mid-market team is looking for its version of Antetokounmpo, a young player who can lift it to a period of the sort of relevance that organizations such as the Celtics and Lakers take as a birthright. But after the initial euphoria of finding these players, frustrating failures in capitalizing on them often follow. The Cleveland Cavaliers surrounded LeBron James, during his seven-year first stint on the team, with now-forgotten fringe stars such as Mo Williams and Antawn Jamison—all brought in to provide the supposed last push to a championship—and were swept out of the only Finals they reached during that era. The New Orleans Pelicans have put a rotating cast of coaches and second fiddles around Anthony Davis, who’s now eager to leave town for a more stable and winning environment. Supposed saviors can sometimes delude higher-ups into thinking that the hard part is done, that titles are only a few tweaks away.

Budenholzer arrived in Milwaukee with a plan to connect the skill set of Antetokounmpo to forward-looking tactics. Where Kidd had run an offense reminiscent of the paint-by-numbers systems James suffered through early in his career, Budenholzer prioritizes putting knock-down shooters around his star. The off-season addition of Brook Lopez, a 7-foot-tall center who can launch from 30 feet, typifies the approach. Milwaukee shot 1,110 more triples over the course of this regular season than they did last year, and graded out as the league’s fourth-most potent offense.

The defense has improved even more drastically. With Antetokounmpo stationed in the lane to wall off passes and smother shot attempts, the Bucks allowed only 104.9 points per 100 possessions—the lowest mark of any team. “Coach Bud did a great job,” Antetokounmpo said recently after Budenholzer’s peers again named him Coach of the Year, “just putting a great culture together, bringing a great atmosphere, making everybody have fun.” He acknowledged that part of that fun might owe to simple winning; Milwaukee’s 60 regular-season victories were the most in the NBA.

As the Bucks have emerged, the shape of Antetokounmpo’s approaching prime has started to come into focus. The job of a franchise player is to stabilize, not experiment—to provide the kind of dependable nightly contribution around which a team can maintain a broader identity. Last year, Houston’s James Harden won MVP honors by dancing through pick-and-rolls and hoisting step-back three-pointers, his activity igniting the Rockets’ offense. Antetokounmpo, in turn, barges into the lane and finishes the play himself, or, if the defense collapses, flicks the ball out to one of the waiting marksmen. Clarity of purpose has suited him. The regular season saw him set career highs in points (27.7), rebounds (12.5), assists (5.9), and field-goal percentage (57.8). Advanced analytics conclude that he’s the most disruptive force near the rim since Shaquille O’Neal’s heyday. If Harden plays like a riddle, Antetokounmpo is an emergency.

Milwaukee’s opening playoff series has proved mostly ceremonial, with a pair of easy wins against the already outmatched Detroit Pistons, who are missing their hobbled forward, Blake Griffin. Still, it’s been a serviceable enough summary of the progress team and star alike have made this season. In Game 1, Antetokounmpo put up 24 points and 17 rebounds in just 24 minutes as the Bucks won by 35. He bore toward the basket, breaking out of a defender’s grip for an and-one layup or reaching over the scrum for a jam. In the third quarter, with another highlight imminent, the Pistons center Andre Drummond shoved Antetokounmpo out of the air. Drummond, a big and tough All-Star center in his own right, didn’t seem to mind the resulting ejection; he looked like he’d had enough of trying to keep up.

This is still the era of Kevin Durant and Stephen Curry. If the Bucks manage to reach the Finals and face the Golden State Warriors, they’ll be heavy underdogs. But where the Warriors might be a dynasty in twilight, the Bucks are the envy of the rest of the league: an already accomplished team still on the upswing, with a plan in place and a star player sure of his role. “I was just trying to be aggressive,” Antetokounmpo said after that first playoff win. “I knew if I was in that aggressive mode the whole game, good things were going to happen.”



When I was, give or take, 10 years old, back in the late 1970s, I would watch Japanese monster movies every Sunday. One channel (of about four or five that were locally available in that televisual Dark Age) specialized in the genre. For this particular weekly segment, it relied mostly on Toho Studios creatures—Rodan, Mothra, and above all, Godzilla—although it occasionally dabbled in Gamera, a giant irradiated turtle offered up, remarkably, by a rival studio that had previously produced Rashomon.

The jewel in the crown, the movie I would wait on for months, was Destroy All Monsters, a mash-up in which Godzilla et al. united to fight a greater menace still: Ghidorah, a three-headed flying creature intent on destroying more than just Tokyo. (That city, I think it’s fair to say, was the unluckiest metropolis ever when it came to destruction via giant-monster attack.)

Godzilla: King of Monsters, the new $150-million-plus Warner Bros. movie, is more or less a remake of Destroy All Monsters. (The attorneys employed by the studio apparently opted for “less,” because Destroy All Monsters is not, to the best of my knowledge, cited anywhere in connection to the film.) The movie is also the third entry in the studio’s half-hearted effort to create a “cinematic universe,” à la Marvel Studios. It is hard to imagine a film failing more completely at its goal.

Let’s begin with the obvious: No significant character from the prior two MonsterVerse films—2014’s Godzilla and 2017’s Kong: Skull Island—makes an appearance in this one, unless you count Godzilla, whose name is right there in the title. Tertiary stars reappear (Ken Watanabe, Sally Hawkins, David Strathairn), but otherwise the film, co-written and directed by Michael Dougherty, could hardly be more deracinated from its theoretical forebears.

Kyle Chandler and Vera Farmiga star as divorced parents whose son was killed in the battle between Godzilla and the MUTOs of the previous Godzilla movie. Millie Bobby Brown (of Stranger Things fame) plays their daughter, providing just the right proportion of unnecessary family drama to fill out a wildly overlong 132-minute film. Farmiga’s character unites with an ex-military ecoterrorist (played by Charles Dance, looking as if he’s still angry about being crossbowed on the toilet in Game of Thrones) to wake up “titans”—i.e., giant monsters—in order to cull humankind to environmentally sustainable levels. This goes precisely as well as you might expect it to.

Among the many idiocies of the film is that it toggles back and forth carelessly between the ideas that its monsters were created by human beings’ nuclear experimentation and that they served as some prehuman, eco-happy balancing act. So we are treated to Mothra (both larval and, later, moth-y), Rodan (essentially a football-field-sized pteranodon), and the tripartite dragon Ghidorah, along with assorted other not-worthy-of-a-name monstrosities. One bears a notable resemblance to a giant snow crab.

I suppose it might be considered a spoiler to say who among these gargantuans wins its ultimate fight. But then again, it’s right there in the title. The biggest loser is, without a doubt, the city of Boston, still reeling from its five-game knockout in the NBA playoffs, only to be flattened once again by a horde of giants. For the rest of us, we have the words of an in-movie newscaster: “This is the single greatest disaster in human history.” It is, as a scan of the front page of any day’s newspaper would attest, an exaggeration. But it would not be out of place on a movie poster.



Ocean Vuong and I are in my car on one of the roads by his house in Northampton, where he’s lived for the past couple of years and teaches poetry at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Vuong is relaxed and chatty in the passenger seat. In just a 10-minute span, it feels as if we’ve covered an hour’s worth of conversation: our jade necklaces (his, a slender carving of the goddess Guan Yin that came from his mother; mine, a funny-shaped lucky peach that was a wedding gift from an aunt); his affinity for writing late at night; the thunderstorm he weathered while at a retreat at an Italian castle that forced him to write part of his new novel by hand.

He directs us to a T. J. Maxx about an hour away in Connecticut, near the nail salon where his mother used to work.

Over the years, Vuong has garnered some of the highest literary praise for his poetry. He’s pocketed a Whiting Award and a T. S. Eliot prize, and The New York Times’ Michiko Kakutani has likened Vuong’s poetry to that of Emily Dickinson and Gerard Manley Hopkins. All this after his poetry collection, Night Sky With Exit Wounds, was published in 2016. It is studded with vestiges of the Vietnam War and the experiences of queer and immigrant folks in America, and pulls partly from his own life.

But with his new novel, On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous, Vuong wades into a different form. I ask him about the transition from writing poetry to prose. “If I had my way, I’d recommend the earnest pursuit of poetry for every writer,” Vuong says while I point us south and carefully follow my car’s navigation, consistently 10 miles under the speed limit, because driving and talking at the same time is not one of my strengths. His logic is that by the time poets write their first collection, they’ve started and finished hundreds of poems, which is a helpful building block for any other kind of writing. “You have much more experience negotiating the fossilization of an idea,” he says. “There’s more trial and error in a moment.”

I’m on this miniature road trip with Vuong for a reason that has much to do with how I first learned his name, more than a decade earlier. It was 2008, my senior year of high school, and one of my English teachers told me about a talented poetry student of his who had graduated a couple of years earlier and was making a go of writing. Though we overlapped for two years at Glastonbury High, Vuong and I didn’t know each other, which is a little feat. Not very many Asian American kids went there; you tend to take stock of your people in situations like that. So I was curious to finally meet him in the place where we spent our adolescent years and visit some of his old haunts.

“I do give a lot of credit to growing up here,” Vuong says, referring to Glastonbury. “Not in a This town made me kind of way, like Old boy does good, you know? But the ways that it was brutal, and how I survived it.”

Vuong knows how to capture the essence of survival in his work. I recall a part of his poem “Someday I’ll Love Ocean Vuong,” from Night Sky. It felt as if I were stealing a glance at a set of self-affirmations, or maybe self-promises:

“Ocean. Ocean—
get up. The most beautiful part of your body
is where it’s headed. & remember,
loneliness is still time spent
with the world.”

As we float down I-91, it’s hard not to think that this trip to Glastonbury is somehow transporting us backwards in time.

There is something surreal and triggering about returning to this place, Vuong and I agree as we pass by his mother’s old nail salon. We have a muscle memory for the town’s handful of strip malls—the buildings adorned with a neat white trim—and the seemingly idyllic housing developments that sprawl along the winding roads. Like Vuong, I spent much of my time as a teenager counting the days until I could leave, and like Vuong, I’ve spent much of my adult life avoiding returning here.

“Oh my God,” he says after we pass a shopping center where he used to work at a natural-food market. “I would bike these whole roads.”

When I first read On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous, I understood Vuong’s regional references immediately: Mozzicato’s, Town Line Diner, Franklin Ave., the enormous tobacco fields and orchards, the McMansions with living rooms the size of houses, the endless evenings. On Earth’s descriptions of Connecticut felt familiar, and yet like I was seeing it in a fresh light, with new vocabulary to describe the peculiar experience of my time there—simultaneous flashes of loneliness and hope for the future.

Glastonbury sits just southeast of Hartford and is tucked along a few bends of the Connecticut River. The first and probably most common adjective people use to describe it is “rich,” because “white” is likely already implied. The high school has about 2,000 students, and its mascot is the Tomahawks, possibly a twisted ode to the Native Americans who lived on this land before white settlers colonized it. An unspoken uniform—common at wealthy Connecticut high schools—made the school’s homogeneity even more conspicuous: black North Face fleece, matching backpack, Ugg boots, and leggings.

We’ve been trading stories throughout the drive about former teachers who helped us (or didn’t); the drug abuse Vuong witnessed and experienced; the enormous striations of class we encountered; the lack of racial diversity that we noted any time we stepped into a room; and the singular definition of masculinity that seemed to pervade the school and town. (One of the most terrifying things people used to say in high school was “no homo,” he tells me later in the day.)

Vuong runs through a list of racist things kids called him: Jackie Chan; SARS, almost creatively, after the flu-like viral disease that had an outbreak in Asia; and the Grudge, a nod to the chilling ghostlike character from the Japanese horror film and its American remake.

I tell him that a couple of kids from middle school—my friends—sometimes called me the Grudge, too. “I’m so sorry I didn’t know you back there,” he says. “I think we would have helped each other out.”

I’m not sure if he’s telling me this because it’s the sort of thing one says to be nice, but we’d been talking so much about how isolated we’d felt that I take this sincerely. During the first couple months of my freshman year, I’d told him earlier in the day, my mom died suddenly from cancer, launching me and my family into grieving disarray for much of my time in high school. It’s a small comfort knowing that someone with a shared experience—though very different—had been nearby.

Vuong’s family fled Vietnam as refugees in 1990, when he was 2, and resettled in Hartford. Through what he describes as some “creative” geographic maneuvering, Vuong’s relatives sent him to Glastonbury’s public schools. When Vuong was 13, his family landed a unit within Glastonbury’s Welles Village, part of the town’s affordable-housing program. (I lived in a neighboring suburb and crossed the river every day to get to school; I was enrolled in the high school’s agriculture program, which was meant to teach students animal and plant science, but seemed in practice to exist mostly to add out-of-town racial diversity to the school.)

“We literally erased ourselves to go to school here,” Vuong says. “And there was shame with that, too, because I didn’t know how to make use of it. Everyone says, ‘It’s a great school,’ and I was like, ‘I dunno! … I don’t know if it’s that great. I feel like I’m judged before I step into any room’ … I couldn’t show my mother anything, like my grades or anything.” Vuong says he had a 1.7 GPA at one point in high school; he was ashamed he didn’t have much to show for the sacrifices his family had made.

On Earth We’re Briefly Gorgeous takes the form of a letter that a young boy named Little Dog writes to his illiterate mother. In trying to explain himself, Little Dog reveals an identity fashioned out of violence and revisits some of the most poignant moments from his childhood: his family’s trauma from the Vietnam War, drug addiction, finding lust and love, understanding his own sexuality, creating solidarity among the women in his family, and ultimately, suffering a great loss.

“I would never call this book a tragic story,” Vuong says. Hope and joy, he notes, are essential to the story too. “I think the best stories have those things side by side—because that’s how life is lived.”

Little Dog and his family live in Hartford, and he sometimes rides his bike across the river and through the rolling, tree-lined hills to a tobacco farm where he works in the summer. He spends much of his free time with a boy named Trevor, whose grandfather runs the farm, and with whom he becomes romantically intertwined. In the novel, Vuong describes the stifling restlessness that comes from living in a place like this, where you don’t fit in—the tender ache to break away, and the needling fear that you’ve been trapped all along.

“As we climbed the road up the steep hill, the starless sky opened up, the trees fell slowly back, and the houses grew further and further apart from one another … We stopped at the top of one of the hills, exhausted. Moonlight appraised the orchard to our right,” Little Dog narrates. “It was Hartford. It was a cluster of light that pulsed with a force I never realized it possessed … The city brims before us with a strange, rare brilliance—as if it was not a city at all, but the sparks made by some god sharpening his weapons above us.”

When I read this description after my conversation with Vuong, I think of something he said about his process. In his work, he told me, he tries to supplant the American mythos that “something is only valuable once we’ve tamed it or conquered it or dominated it.” He strives for a more complicated view. “I think my approach to this book was to have a different route,” he said. “There are no victims and no villains.”

He wanted to afford every character—a human, a place, an idea—its own agency.

With the navigation off, I drive a little aimlessly along Glastonbury’s main strip while Vuong points out the landmarks of his teenage years: That’s the Dunkin’ Donuts where, his senior year, he used to pull sacks of day-old donuts and bagels from the Dumpster at 11 o’clock at night, re-bag them, and then sell them for 50 cents to classmates and teachers the next morning.

That’s the Panera where he worked, which seemed so bougie to him then.

Vuong then directs me down his old street, Risley Road, which appears in one of his poems, “Dear Rose.” As we drive past small houses that have been split into duplexes, he notes the ones where people he knew overdosed. “We didn’t know what was happening to us, you know? That was just how we coped,” he’d said earlier. “We didn’t have rides to basketball. We couldn’t participate in any after-school clubs … there were drugs. And the drugs helped.”

This was Connecticut deep in its opioid epidemic, before there was much clarity on how widespread the issue was. (On Earth captures this crisis: “I never did heroin because I’m chicken about needles,” Little Dog says. “When I declined his offer to shoot it, Trevor, tightening the cell phone charger around his arm with his teeth, nodded toward my feet. ‘Looks like you dropped your tampon.’ Then he winked, smiled—and faded back into the dream he made of himself.”)

In high school, Vuong understood he had to leave Connecticut. At the urging of a guidance counselor—and by studying the tenets of Buddhism in the school library—he slowly began to make alterations to his life, which included stopping his drug use and making more of an effort with schoolwork. After spending some time at a community college, Vuong headed to Pace University, in New York, to study marketing. His time there lasted only a few weeks before he understood it wasn’t for him. But he couldn’t bring himself to head back to Connecticut, where his mother was proudly telling clients her son was studying business.

There was poetry, though. Since high school, there had always been poetry; he’d written in his diary at age 15 that one day, he’d be a poet, finally. “They say if you wish something true—you must say it over and over,” he wrote in an entry he posted on Instagram. To make this true, he enrolled in a program at Brooklyn College. But Vuong quickly realized that even when surrounded by other writers, he felt like an outsider. He recalls one of his first literary events in New York. He was dressed in sweatpants, and a woman gave him the classic up-and-down look, as if to say, How did you get in?

“At one point, one woman turned to me and says, ‘Really, you’re so lucky. You get to write about war. I’m white, I got nothing,’” Vuong says. “The crazy thing, I was so naive I believed her, because she was from Columbia [University]. I said, ‘Oh my God, you’re right.’” (He says now that writers like that have a “willing amnesia … to convince themselves they have nothing, when in fact they have everything.”)

After the success of Night Sky, some people suggested he write about other things besides war, violence, queerness, and immigration. But he felt he wasn’t finished asking questions about those themes—all integral to understanding American identity. So he set to work on his novel, which itself seemed to be a pointed act.

“I wanted to be inspired by these poor, yellow bodies,” he says, “and to see that their bodies inspired me towards literature with a capital L, the way white, aristocratic bodies were so often inspired to Tolstoy, and you know, Proust and Woolf.”

As he began writing On Earth, Vuong says he tried to stick to the facts of his life. But just a few paragraphs in, he found himself embellishing details to push the story forward, as he did with his poems. “I wanted to invoke or invite an autobiographical reading, but refuse it ultimately,” Vuong says. “The book would be founded on truth, but realized by the imagination.”

In a way, it seems fitting that Vuong’s novel is constructed as a letter his speaker, Little Dog, writes to his mother, which she will never be able to read. There is something striking about Little Dog’s quest for delivering a truth only he might know, as though the act of simply telling a story is enough.

Even as Vuong’s life has pulled him from Connecticut, he’s still planting roots there—or at least, helping his family do so.

After graduating from Brooklyn College, Vuong toyed with returning to work at a Panera. He was in the process of applying to graduate school, and hadn’t yet published Night Sky or received his teaching gig at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. He reasoned he could stick around at a Panera for a few years, become district manager, make a decent living, and help out his mother financially. When Vuong won the Whiting Award, in 2016, he used the prize money as a down payment for a modest home for his mother in another Hartford suburb.

Vuong credits much of his upbringing to being raised by his mother, who had him young. “We didn’t have therapy. Nobody told us anything. We kind of just stumbled together,” Vuong says. “There’s a beauty to that; you have to collaborate very closely with your life … in retrospect, I preferred it that way.”

That type of relationship with a parent seems so familiar to us immigrant kids and kids of immigrants. You’re taught, culturally, to respect and care for your elders, yes; but something about seeing your parents displaced in this country makes you feel more protective of their sacrifices, more tender despite their complications and the ways they might have hurt you, and more prone to parenting them, in addition to yourself.

“Again, it comes down to agency,” Vuong says. He tells me, as we sit in the parking lot of Glastonbury’s community center, where he gave a reading a couple of years ago, that his mother was diagnosed with a terminal illness just a month and a half earlier.

“I felt like I was in another dimension,” Vuong says. “You know, you’re in a different world. What literary world? What books?” He’s currently on leave from teaching, and he translates for his mother at doctor appointments—a role not unsimilar to the one he used to assume when he was a kid.

Something about family always reminds him of where he’s from. “I still come from this broken ilk,” Vuong says. “I just bailed out two cousins this year. I [didn’t] know how to bail anyone out; it was a very humble moment because, ‘You’re Ocean Vuong, you’re Ocean Vuong’—every room you go into, ‘You’re Ocean Vuong.’ And then all of a sudden you’re in a police department and you don’t know how to bail somebody out … You realize, this other part of your life—these skills atrophy when you don’t use them.”

They may atrophy, but they’re always there. I see a version of this when we are in South Glastonbury, by the tobacco farm where Vuong worked more than a decade ago. Vuong directed us to this spot because his character Little Dog spends a lot of time here in the novel.

“I think you’re feeling what I’m feeling, too,” Vuong had said to me earlier when we were in the car and I was circling the fields, unsure where to park. “Like there’s this bodily notion of trespass ... I felt that when I was here. There’s such an ingrained sense of trespass. Because you know that as soon as they see your face, they know you don’t live here.”

As we’re walking by an orchard, we encounter two people within minutes of each other. We’re graduate students at UConn studying suburban farming, Vuong says each time, before they can ask why we’re here. He mentions he went to school here, and offers trivia about corn and tobacco plants and growing seasons. On our way back to my car, an older man, white like the others we’ve met, intercepts us and makes conversation with Vuong.

“Now, these are all our friends or relatives?” he says eventually, scanning our faces. Vuong and I are with a photographer and her friend, and all of us happen to be about the same age and Asian American.

“These are friends—well, classmates,” Vuong says.

“Now, you’re all Korean?”

“I’m Vietnamese,” Vuong says. We go around the circle and play our turn in this familiar game. Chinese, the photographer says. Chinese, I tell the man. Korean, the photographer’s friend says. The man launches into a story about being stationed in Korea, to which we all nod along. When he leaves, the four of us bolt to our cars.

“That was like Get Out,” Vuong says as he buckles his seatbelt. He’s summing up the way that, upon coming across each curious stranger, Vuong, the photographer, her friend, and I all tensed and slipped into an automatic and uneasy politeness. Yes, I agree. Sort of like Get Out. It’s funny how, despite all the years that have passed, despite all the measures we’ve taken to leave, it’s like we’re back in high school—how vulnerable we feel, how foreign.

before I drop him off at the house he bought for his mother, and before I head to my dad’s place across the river, we’re standing at a congested intersection. I walk haphazardly across the street.

Vuong shuffles in step next to me. As a person of color, he says while gesturing at the crosswalk, he doesn’t think cars usually see him. “I could have never done that,” he says. “It would take me a long time” to get across.

I laugh. I had only crossed because I thought he’d also started to walk.

I understand what Vuong means about often not feeling seen. But after spending a day with him, I find myself thinking—a bit earnestly—that he’s somehow retroactively rendered my own high school experience less painful, just by virtue of being in that same temporal space, even though we hadn’t met. In a way, Vuong works this same magic through his poetry, and now, his novel; he builds a world that draws from his own life and, in turn, makes the reader’s experience more real, more beautiful, and more our own.

It’s as if he followed his mother’s advice and took this notion of invisibleness and tried to turn it into something so concrete, no one could look away.

“If you don’t do it, who will?” his mother frequently asked him. “If you won’t do it, who will?”

1. The Disappearance

At 12:42 a.m. on the quiet, moonlit night of March 8, 2014, a Boeing 777-200ER operated by Malaysia Airlines took off from Kuala Lumpur and turned toward Beijing, climbing to its assigned cruising altitude of 35,000 feet. The designator for Malaysia Airlines is MH. The flight number was 370. Fariq Hamid, the first officer, was flying the airplane. He was 27 years old. This was a training flight for him, the last one; he would soon be fully certified. His trainer was the pilot in command, a man named Zaharie Ahmad Shah, who at 53 was one of the most senior captains at Malaysia Airlines. In Malaysian style, he was known by his first name, Zaharie. He was married and had three adult children. He lived in a gated development. He owned two houses. In his first house he had installed an elaborate Microsoft flight simulator.

"It’s not true that no one needs you anymore.”

These words came from an elderly woman sitting behind me on a late-night flight from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C. The plane was dark and quiet. A man I assumed to be her husband murmured almost inaudibly in response, something to the effect of “I wish I was dead.”

Again, the woman: “Oh, stop saying that.”

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

I didn’t mean to eavesdrop, but couldn’t help it. I listened with morbid fascination, forming an image of the man in my head as they talked. I imagined someone who had worked hard all his life in relative obscurity, someone with unfulfilled dreams—perhaps of the degree he never attained, the career he never pursued, the company he never started.

Arguments before the United States Court of Appeals are usually dry, esoteric, and nerdy. What would it take to make one go viral? This week, in a clip that launched a million angry Facebook posts, we found out. It took a lawyer for the United States telling a panel of incredulous Ninth Circuit judges that it is “safe and sanitary” to confine immigrant children in facilities without soap or toothbrushes and to make them sleep on concrete floors under bright lights.

This assertion generated widespread outrage. Sarah Fabian, the senior attorney in the Department of Justice’s Office of Immigration Litigation who uttered it, was instantly excoriated online. As fate would have it, the clip of her argument went viral at the same time as a new wave of reports of brutal and inhumane conditions at immigrant confinement centers. It also immediately followed the raucous debate over Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez referring to the confinement centers as concentration camps. The juxtaposition suggested, misleadingly, that the Trump administration was explicitly justifying the worst sorts of child mistreatment we were seeing on the news.

In the faint predawn light, the ship doesn’t look unusual. It is one more silhouette looming pier-side at Naval Base San Diego, a home port of the U.S. Pacific Fleet. And the scene playing out in its forward compartment, as the crew members ready themselves for departure, is as old as the Navy itself. Three sailors in blue coveralls heave on a massive rope. “Avast!” a fourth shouts. A percussive thwack announces the pull of a tugboat—and 3,000 tons of warship are under way.

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

But now the sun is up, and the differences start to show.

Most obvious is the ship’s lower contour. Built in 2014 from 30 million cans’ worth of Alcoa aluminum, Littoral Combat Ship 10, the USS Gabrielle Giffords, rides high in the water on three separate hulls and is powered like a jet ski—that is, by water-breathing jets instead of propellers. This lets it move swiftly in the coastal shallows (or “littorals,” in seagoing parlance), where it’s meant to dominate. Unlike the older ships now gliding past—guided-missile cruisers, destroyers, amphibious transports—the littoral combat ship was built on the concept of “modularity.” There’s a voluminous hollow in the ship’s belly, and its insides can be swapped out in port, allowing it to set sail as a submarine hunter, minesweeper, or surface combatant, depending on the mission.

Americans often lament the rise of “extreme partisanship,” but this is a poor description of political reality: Far from increasing, Americans’ attachment to their political parties has considerably weakened over the past years. Liberals no longer strongly identify with the Democratic Party and conservatives no longer strongly identify with the Republican Party.

What is corroding American politics is, specifically, negative partisanship: Although most liberals feel conflicted about the Democratic Party, they really hate the Republican Party. And even though most conservatives feel conflicted about the Republican Party, they really hate the Democratic Party.

America’s political divisions are driven by hatred of an out-group rather than love of the in-group. The question is: why?

At least 2,000 children have now been forcibly separated from their parents by the United States government. Their stories are wrenching. Antar Davidson, a former youth-care worker at an Arizona shelter, described to the Los Angeles Times children “huddled together, tears streaming down their faces,” because they believed that their parents were dead. Natalia Cornelio, an attorney with the Texas Human Rights Project, told CNN about a Honduran mother whose child had been ripped away from her while she was breastfeeding. “Inside an old warehouse in South Texas, hundreds of children wait in a series of cages created by metal fencing,” the Associated Press reported. “One cage had 20 children inside.”

On Monday night, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez declared in an Instagram video that “the United States is running concentration camps on our southern border.” The following morning, Liz Cheney tweeted, “Please @AOC do us all a favor and spend just a few minutes learning some actual history. 6 million Jews were exterminated in the Holocaust. You demean their memory and disgrace yourself with comments like this.” After that, the fight was on.

On its face, the fight was about using concentration camp outside the context of the Holocaust. In a subsequent tweet, Ocasio-Cortez linked to an Esquire article noting that the term pre-dates World War II. It quoted the historian Andrea Pitzer, who defines concentration camp as the “mass detention of civilians without trial.” To Ocasio-Cortez’s critics, this was too cute by half. Whatever the term’s historical origins or technical meaning, in American popular discourse concentration camp evokes the Holocaust. By using the term, they argued, the representative from New York was equating Donald Trump’s immigration policies with Nazi genocide, whether she admitted it or not.

About 65 million years ago, shortly after the time of the dinosaurs, a new critter popped up on the evolutionary scene. This “scampering animal,” as researchers described it, was likely small, ate bugs, and had a furry tail. It looked, according to artistic renderings, like an especially aggressive New York City rat. And it had a placenta, an organ that grows deep into the maternal body in order to nourish the fetus during pregnancy.

The rodentlike thing would become the common ancestor of the world’s placental mammals, with descendants that include whales, bats, dogs, and humans, among many other species. And today, the placenta might hold the key to one of the most enduring mysteries in human medicine: Why do women suffer much higher rates of autoimmune disease than men do?

Updated at 12:07 p.m. on June 19, 2019

Like most other colleges across the country, Newbury College, a small, private liberal-arts school in Brookline, Massachusetts, held classes through the end of this past spring semester and then bid farewell to cap-and-gown-wearing seniors. But unlike almost every other college, those classes, and that farewell, were the school’s last: Newbury officially ceased operations at the end of May.

One of the first sources to publicly confirm the long-rumored closure was the president’s blog, where the news was shared last December. “It is with a heavy heart,” the school’s president, Joseph Chillo, wrote, “that I announce our intention to commence the closing of Newbury College, this institution we love so dearly.”

There’s a moment about 15 minutes into the first episode of Years and Years that made me gasp at its audacity, its prescience, its visual horror. The new six-part series from the British writer Russell T. Davies (Doctor Who, A Very English Scandal) charts the life of the Lyons family over the course of 15 years, starting in 2019 and ending in 2034. It’s a kitchen-sink saga that barrels its way through births and marriages and betrayals, but also through the near-future. In 2024, Stephen Lyons (played by Rory Kinnear), a financial adviser, is at home with his wife, Celeste (T’nia Miller), both rushing their way through the morning routine. When the camera turns to their teenage daughter Bethany (Lydia West), her face isn’t recognizably human. Instead, she looks like a 3-D version of a Snapchat puppy, with vast cartoon eyes, wagging pink ears, and a brown snout. When she talks, her voice is grotesquely distorted, a robotic hallucination of a child’s cadence. “I might have to start limiting filter time,” Celeste says in the same exasperated, noncommittal way that you might think, I really should spend less time on Twitter.



“At 99 percent of the speed of light, the entire sky converged before our eyes,” intones Monte (played by Robert Pattinson), one of the lonely sailors aboard a mysterious starship, early on in Claire Denis’s new film, High Life. “The sensation of moving backwards even though we’re moving forwards, getting further from what’s getting nearer. Sometimes I just can’t stand it.” He’s one of several prisoners huddled aboard a brick-shaped vessel, zooming toward a black hole to carry out an energy experiment that will result in their certain death. Denis’s film confronts that funereal irony with her characteristic bleak wit and sense of invention. Monte’s mission is utterly futuristic, but the circumstances in which his crewmates find themselves are familiar—they’re going forward and backward simultaneously, making great progress for humanity at great moral cost.

Throughout her directing career, Denis has reveled in the intimacy and skin-crawling horror that can bubble up when bodies are thrown together in some unusual context—whether that’s the Djibouti outpost where lustful soldiers clash in her masterpiece Beau Travail, or the Parisian dating scene, as in last year’s Let the Sunshine In. High Life follows that format, taking a bunch of nervy convicts and cramming them into a cold, clinical environment to be both physically and emotionally tested. But the film is also a surprising departure for Denis in a number of ways: It’s her first science-fiction movie, it’s entirely in English, and it’s her first collaboration with Pattinson, a marquee idol who has transformed into one of art cinema’s most exciting presences in recent years.

High Life is a nebulous, sometimes gory, and other times strangely lurid experience, light-years away from the stately, epic tone of sci-fi classics such as 2001. Denis is working with a smaller budget and a limited number of sets, but her film is still suffused with the awe-inspiring mixture of dread and calm that only outer space can conjure. There’s nary an action scene or a death-defying set piece, but the bizarre situation unfolding aboard Monte’s unnamed vessel is chilling enough to make the viewer question the value of life. The prisoners are staring down the inscrutable void of a black hole, and as the film progresses, they start to reflect that existential terror in all kinds of fascinating, and sometimes even hopeful, ways.

Monte and his companions—who include the gardener Tcherny (André Benjamin), the passionate Boyse (Mia Goth), and the sociopathic Ettore (Ewan Mitchell)—are all outcasts from society, their lives deemed disposable when weighed against a world-saving mission. High Life’s fragmented screenplay (written by Denis, Jean-Pol Fargeau, and Geoff Cox) gradually reveals the characters’ backstories as it cuts between various timelines. Much of the movie’s early portion, however, focuses on Monte and the infant girl he’s raising, named Willow—both of whom, it’s revealed, are the last surviving prisoners. As the pair stumbles around the deteriorating craft, Denis fills the soundtrack with the wrenching sound of the baby’s crying, until Monte finally begs Willow to stop before he loses it. Later on in the film, as the details of the child’s birth unravel, it becomes clear that Denis is telling a story about love being stretched to its absolute limits.

The few glimpses Denis allows of Earth are drearily industrial, while the ship itself, designed by the artist Ólafur Eliasson, is more of a gilded cage: a smooth-looking series of boxes, grilles, and panels that are almost oppressively free of personality. The prisoners are subjected to nightmarish experiments by Dr. Dibs (Juliette Binoche), a fertility specialist who is trying, and failing, to create new life in the most hostile of environments. Binoche plays Dibs as a sort of cosmic witch; she sports an impressive tangle of jet-black hair and has all kinds of surgical torture devices at her disposal (including a chamber called a “Fuck Box” that’s exactly as visceral as it sounds). But really, she’s a soul as tormented as everyone else on the ship—someone wrestling with the possibility that humanity, as an ongoing endeavor, might be doomed.

That’s the grim undercurrent boiling away in many a Denis film, but particularly here, as befitting a tale that speculates on the end of the world. Yet even as the situation aboard the ship gets stranger and tenser, High Life keeps cutting ahead to that eerie coda of Monte and his daughter, alone together, barreling toward unavoidable death but inextricably bonded. For all its body horrors and apocalyptic conclusions, High Life is one of Denis’s most loving and tender creations.



An onstage pyramid, two hundred performers, and an audience sprawling across a desert field: Beyoncé’s 2018 Coachella show was big. Yet it was little, too. One could spend the two hours of Netflix’s new documentary Homecoming just taking in facial expressions—the furious widened eyes of the majorette who kicked things off, the stuck-out tongue of a male drummer gyrating low to the ground, the knowing wink of Destiny’s Child’s Kelly Rowland. Beyoncé gives supermodel smolder, and glistening pageant grins, and kiddy giggles. Individuals in the crowd perform the Wile E. Coyote jaw drop, or they just cry.

Macro, micro, personal, political: Beyoncé always works on many levels, achieving the kind of complexity one might call “effortless” if she didn’t go out of her way to show how much sweat it took. Last year’s Coachella set wowed the festivalgoers and fans live-streaming it online, but the full footage hasn’t been available officially until now. Released today, Homecoming cuts together the two weekends of performance—yellow-costumed for the first and fuchsia for the second—with a multiplicity of camera angles and filters. As importantly, it zaps from the stage to the prep, which took eight months of intensive labor. You’re seeing the magic trick, and you’re seeing how it was done.

It’s an amazing trick, still. In a voice-over, Beyoncé says she tried to make the show as “graphic” as it could be, which would seem to refer to bold shapes, bright colors, and other elements of clean, militant bombast. But she also talked about fussing over mini details, and now the world can rewind and scrutinize them as well. Someone’s seen stitching tiny jewels in a constellation pattern to the top of a beret. Beyoncé, fatigued post-pregnancy, struggles to learn intricate hand choreography. She says she personally picked each dancer, wanting to showcase “different characters” in the ensemble: unique faces, unalike body shapes, personal ways of moving.

This was smart stagecraft, hypnotizing spectators with mass movement and surprising them with divergence. It also served a deeper purpose. Beychella, as the event was nicknamed, celebrated historically black colleges and universities, which is to say it was an outpouring of pride in black traditions and excellence. Beyoncé played teacher, and her teaching text was the body. “It was important to me that everyone who had never seen themselves represented felt like they were on that stage with us,” she says in the film. “Black women often feel underestimated. I wanted us to be proud of not only the show, but the process … I wanted everyone to feel thankful for their curves, their sass, their honesty—thankful for their freedom.”

Motivation such as this has long been her mission, expressed in what appears to be her favorite kind of choreography: the formation. Pop stars and marching bands both, of course, routinely order human beings into synchronized onenesses. But in Beyoncé’s case, a shiver of excitement often comes from slight difference. For the performance of “Partition” at Coachella, she sat at the bottom of her bleachers, with a single-file line of women extending up the pyramid behind her. As she opened her legs, they opened their legs. But they did so microseconds behind, for a waterfalling effect. It was like a hall of mirrors, but with each reflection her own person, with her own agency.

Some of the most blazing moments, in fact, came when Beyoncé surrendered or shared the spotlight. Ligament-twisting ballerinas, the fluid-and-robotic breakdancers known as Les Twins, Francesca Simone’s heavy-metal shredding, Solange jerking and high-kicking: The excellence was diverse, and viral stars are already emerging from the film (hello, Bugaboo Rocket!). Homecoming spends a little time with a few team members’ personal stories but puts more focus on simply watching their talents at work. Beyoncé’s voice-over makes clear that she’s as amazed as the viewer must be: “The things that these young people can do with their bodies, and the music they can play, and the drumrolls, and the haircuts, and the bodies … It’s just not right! It’s just so much damn swag.”

The soundtrack to this teeming human pageant was inclusive, too, going beyond the star’s oeuvre to a wider black canon, including the rap classic O. T. Genasis’s “Everybody Mad,” the cherished “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” and Nina Simone’s anguished take on “Lilac Wine.” But Beyoncé’s own music wasn’t lost. As cuts from across her catalog were reanimated with new acoustic vibrancy—bass became brass, drum machines rendered back into drums—so too were their meanings. The portable empowerment messages of “Flawless” and “Feeling Myself,” the smitten ecstasy of “Drunk in Love” and “Deja Vu,” and the marital drama of “I Care” and “Don’t Hurt Yourself” all came through. Over the years, she’s sold the idea that these are songs about an actual woman with an actual husband who just happens to be actually famous. But on this stage, Beyoncé cheered how they’d become everyone’s songs.

She’s released the Coachella set as a live album, and it’s a thunderous, welcome addition to her catalog. It’s not its fullest self, though, without the images, which gratifyingly are no longer confined to bootleg clips. But the Homecoming movie’s combo of well-edited stage spectacle and behind-the-scenes segments—intimate, hard-fought, occasionally tense, politically explicit, personally specific segments—make it a career-defining document. Like Beyoncé’s great visual albums, it’s about obsession, created by obsession, and sure to inspire obsession. Like all masterpieces, it’s almost angering, because so little else compares to it. “If my country ass can do it,” Beyoncé says at one point when talking about her desire to inspire others, “they can do it.” If only!



Alicia Hall Moran moved across the stage at Carnegie Hall’s Stern Auditorium in late March, her mezzo-soprano carrying across the sold-out venue of almost 3,000. Supported by her husband, the MacArthur-winning jazz pianist Jason Moran, and by the Harlem Chamber Players orchestra, she unspooled an original song in dreamlike tones: “You don’t need me to tell you / All the things that one can do / In sunny California.”

Titled “Believe Me,” the piece might well refer to Hall Moran’s own family history: Many of her relatives, including her great-uncle Hall Johnson, the famed composer and arranger, moved to California in the early 1900s, escaping the racial hostilities of the South. But in Los Angeles, even as they prospered, they found something less than total freedom. So “Believe Me” ends on an ambiguous note, suggesting an odyssey still ongoing: “All the things we didn’t say / All the things we did not do / We just kept on walking.”

This performance was one of many high moments in “Two Wings: The Music of Black America in Migration,” a concert designed by the Morans to explore the songs and sounds that accompanied black lives throughout the Great Migration. That movement, from roughly 1915 to 1970, saw millions of African Americans moving into cities across the country as they fled the neo-slavery of sharecropping. The Morans’ expansive presentation (which traveled to Washington, D.C., and Berlin after Carnegie Hall, and to Chicago last month) was written with the help of Isabel Wilkerson’s landmark history of the migration, The Warmth of Other Suns, but it put me in mind of another book: Saidiya Hartman’s Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments, a groundbreaking work published just a month before “Two Wings” debuted.

In writing Wayward Lives, Hartman exhumed the often-buried stories of working-class black women in the early 20th century as they moved to northern cities en masse. She dug into the testimonies of “wayward” young women who had been sent to mental hospitals and reformatories, and into the press coverage of lesser-known entertainers in Harlem. Through deep archival work, Hartman managed to recover the powerful subjectivity of her characters, often by giving voice to their thoughts and desires—and to the music and art they made.

Like Hartman, the Morans are devoted to elevating voices that have not often been heard, and to articulating connections between the highest levels of black society and the lowest. “Two Wings,” which spans nearly three hours, featured performances from some of the leading voices in gospel, jazz, folk, and Western classical music; for the Morans, it was an opportunity to put a version of the black American musical canon into venues that, even today, seldom make space for its full breadth. The Morans’ guest performers throughout the evening included the gospel-piano virtuoso Joseph Joubert; the Imani Winds quintet; the vocalist, pianist, and pastor Smokie Norful; and Wilkerson, who read passages from Other Suns.

As the Morans assembled the “Two Wings” program over a two-year period, they let the Wilkerson book’s stories echo alongside their own family lore. Hall Johnson’s history, for instance, resonated with the narratives from Other Suns, like the one of a doctor who moved his family to L.A. only to find a palm tree burning on his lawn the night he arrived. “It was not unlike the crosses that burned in the South,” Wilkerson writes, “except this was California.”

Hartman’s book, meanwhile, traces a quiet social realignment taking place during this era—what the author calls “the revolution before Gatsby.” Before the flappers caused a stir in the 1920s; before it became socially acceptable for, say, white women to smoke cigarettes in public; and before women had even gained the right to vote, the young women she writes about were stubbornly demanding new forms of personal liberation, simply by living their lives as they pleased. More often gainfully employed than their male counterparts, black women in the early 20th century might have been breadwinners, proud single parents, unapologetic libertines, same-sex spouses, or community leaders. They were engaged in what Hartman describes as “a beautiful experiment in how-to-live”—a process not just of assimilating into the city, but also of rewriting American social norms in their image.

In doing this research, relying mostly on sources that sought to either condemn or corral the women she was writing about, Hartman found herself grappling “with the power and authority of the archive and the limits it sets on what can be known.” Her practice, in this sense, has much in common with the Morans’. Jazz and classical musicians are lovers of archives, and they’re able to unlock powerful emotional and intellectual work from within old material. But the most nuanced practitioners are also troubled by its limitations.

“Two Wings,” in this way, works as historical corrective, guided by a commitment to scrambling, reordering, and recontextualizing the history of bodies “in motion.” (The very act of bringing this cast of musicians into Carnegie Hall had an element of transgression. As Moran wrote in the concert’s program notes, “We’re ready to etch our mark in the walls.”) “Two Wings” includes Harlem Renaissance–era jazz tunes, gospel hymns, the Morans’ own compositions, and a piece by the oft-overlooked classical composer George Walker. The Morans hired Norful to deliver a sermon and sing “Dear God” (declaring melismatically, “Thank you for my life”), and they put him immediately after Lawrence Brownlee, a primo operatic tenor. Program order can connote seniority, Hall Moran noted in an interview, so putting Norful after an opera singer, in a setting where he normally might not be heard at all, felt significant.

Not that Brownlee was an easy act to follow. He sang “There’s a Man Going ’Round Taking Names,” a traditional piece best known for the version by the blues legend Leadbelly, with simple, repetitious lyrics that refer to a slaver, or an officer of the law, or perhaps the grim reaper. Brownlee’s voice stretched like leather toward his highest notes; as the song ended, he held a single word (“Death!”), and Moran pounded the keys with both hands. Spare, dissonant harmonies rang at either end of the keyboard—Moran was doing an Ellington thing, a Monk thing, something rebellious and foreboding.

“Two Wings” was conceived as part of Carnegie Hall’s Migrations festival, which was meant to highlight the importance of mass movements in shaping American history, and perhaps to tacitly rebuke the ethno-nationalism of President Donald Trump’s immigration policies. Moran told me that when Carnegie Hall first invited him to produce a concert for the festival, he made it clear that he wouldn’t perform without Hall Moran. “What you think I am is because of her,” he remembered telling the organizers. Besides, migration has long been a central theme of Hall Moran’s work, snaking through original songs such as “Open Door,” “Deep River,” and “Oklahoma Girl.” Her debut album’s title, Here Today, itself suggests constant transience.

But even songs of fugitivity and displacement can become a kind of home. Referring to three early-jazz pieces played in succession during “Two Wings,” each by a different soloist, Moran wrote in the program notes: “Each of these pieces reflects a place. They give us a sense of the hood and the air, the cause and the effect, effectively the call and the response.”

The Morans talked about the importance of place when I caught up with them last month at their home in Harlem. Over the past two decades, they have seen the faces in their building on Riverside Drive change as gentrification has forced many residents out. “None of the other black families are still here. Most of the Dominican families are not here,” Hall Moran told me. “It’s a white building now.” As Hartman outlines in her book, the couple’s famous neighborhood became primarily black only after white violence chased black people out of Lower Manhattan and Midtown in the early 20th century. By defining Harlem as a refuge not from the American South but from the white mob waiting just a few dozen blocks below, Hartman shows that black bodies have never been allowed to rest: Even in the earliest years of the migration, the idea that freedom might be found in the North was proving to be a fallacy.

Moran has found something similar happening in Chicago, where “Two Wings” recently landed. Over the past 20 years, hundreds of thousands of black Chicagoans have left the city, many moving to Atlanta and Birmingham and other points south, escaping inadequate public housing and schools, and high rates of crime. In 2014, when Moran and the artist Theaster Gates were working with high-school musicians in the Kenwood Academy Jazz Band, a young member of the ensemble was shot and killed just two weeks before their concert premiere. The children at Kenwood face poverty-related traumas that are just as directly tied to policies of discrimination as what Moran’s relatives were dealt in the South.

Taken together, “Two Wings” and Wayward Lives invite audiences and readers to understand the history of African American migration as ongoing, a condition of existence in a hostile country. Amidst that movement, the ever-growing repertoire of black American song—whether performed on stages big or small—has provided a grounding force and a source of inspiration. “In the broken circle of the dance floor, Mabel and her friends readied to get free,” Hartman writes in Wayward Lives, describing Mabel Hampton, who danced to jazz at Harlem Renaissance cabarets. “It didn’t matter whether it was a basement dive or a music hall. In its broadest sense, choreography—this practice of bodies in motion—was a call to freedom.”



By all accounts, 2015 was a make-or-break moment for musical shows on television. Glee finally fizzled out, three years after The Atlantic’s Kevin Fallon declared that “the TV-musical experiment has failed.” In his 2012 piece, Fallon argued that campy programs such as Glee and Smash had squandered their promising starts, dropping in terms of both quality and ratings. Smash ended in 2013 after just two seasons, but Glee kept trying in vain to recapture its old magic. When the show finally wrapped, in March 2015, it was easy to conclude that if a TV musical watched by more than 13 million people in its prime couldn’t make it, nothing else could.

Mere months later, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend arrived on The CW. A fresh take on the comedy musical, the series introduced Rebecca Bunch (played by Rachel Bloom), a high-flying lawyer and self-proclaimed feminist. At the start of the show, she uprooted her life in New York to follow her childhood crush, Josh Chan (Vincent Rodriguez III), to his Southern California hometown in search of happiness. The show has received praise for its nuanced and funny portrayal of Rebecca, whose self-destructive and narcissistic tendencies were later revealed to stem from borderline personality disorder. (Bloom, unsurprisingly, won a Golden Globe for her fantastic lead performance.)

When Crazy Ex-Girlfriend ends Friday, after four stellar seasons and more than 150 songs, it’ll be remembered for reviving the TV-musical experiment. But the show also deserves praise for allowing its musical format to evolve alongside its protagonist. Just as Rebecca has transformed from a chaotic, selfish mess into a more compassionate, empathic person learning to live with mental illness, so too have the show’s song-and-dance numbers come to reflect the new, more liberated perspective of its heroine.

Rebecca’s mental-health struggles have been at the heart of the show from the very first episode, in which viewers see the character tip pills into a garbage disposal while listening to a voicemail left by her mother, berating her for a previous suicide attempt. Rebecca later tells her therapist that she likes to visualize her life “as a series of musical numbers,” because doing so allows her to escape from her overwhelming emotions and her unfeeling family. This framing device places Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’s musical numbers firmly in the realm of the imaginary—unlike many TV musicals, à la Glee, Smash, and Nashville, where the characters themselves are talented performers, a fact that’s meant to justify their regularly breaking into song.

By contrast, the star of Crazy Ex-Girlfriend isn’t a talented performer; in fact, in the world of the show, Rebecca is supposed to be a terrible singer. But she’s a stage enthusiast, which sets her apart from her peers in the suburban California town of West Covina. “I hate musical theater,” Rebecca’s roommate Heather (Vella Lovell) says in a recent episode. “People are talking and then they just start singing, and it’s always just like, what?” She’s got a point. A genre where groups of strangers spontaneously burst into song in the street, prompting the surrounding crowd to perform a carefully choreographed dance routine, requires a certain tolerance for earnestness and a suspension of disbelief on the part of the audience. Because Crazy Ex-Girlfriend makes the song-and-dance numbers an entirely imaginary manifestation of Rebecca’s mental state, viewers can more easily accept its musical elements.





Since the music in the show isn’t bound by a need to be naturalistic or rational, the songwriters have free rein to create gloriously silly, highly produced parodies with titles such as “I Love My Daughter (But Not in a Creepy Way)” and “I Gave You a UTI.” The pilot’s opening number, “West Covina,” exemplifies this joyful extravagance. The song is a hilarious love letter to Rebecca’s new town—complete with a marching band, a 35-piece orchestral accompaniment, and a huge synchronized dance performance—that ends with Rebecca suspended above the city on a giant pretzel. The number functions as an “I Want” song (a trope in musical theater that serves to lay out the protagonist’s desires), one that paints West Covina as “the Garden of Eden” because that’s where Josh lives, Bloom said. The cartoonish sparkle that Rebecca projects onto the mundane town is humorously ironic, but it also offers insight into how the character’s powerful feelings about Josh spill out into the world around her.

Bloom has previously described each of the show’s seasons as covering a different stage of the stereotypical crazy ex’s actions: “falling in love with someone, being obsessed with them, getting over them, and the path to recovery.” By the third and fourth seasons, Rebecca’s priorities have changed, and the show’s musical framework has shifted with them. After countless cycles of self-destructive behavior centered on Josh, Rebecca undergoes a psychological reassessment that leads to her finally being diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. As she waits for her evaluation results in the episode “Josh Is Irrelevant,” Rebecca sings “A Diagnosis”—a new “I Want” song in which she finally understands that she can find happiness only in herself. The next episode is the first in all three seasons not to feature Josh’s name in its title. By Season 4, the episode titles have dropped male names altogether, as Rebecca attempts to focus less on romance and more on herself.

Rebecca in recovery after her diagnosis is, as Arielle Bernstein writes for The Guardian, “more self-aware, willing to listen and learn, and ready to apply the skills she’s learned in therapy.” As Rebecca simultaneously looks within herself and listens to the people around her, her previously introspective solos are redistributed among the wider cast. In Season 4’s opening episode, viewers see this shift in “No One Else Is Singing My Song.” What begins as a self-indulgent ballad from Rebecca ends with 11 supporting-cast members singing along with her in perfect harmony, each character lamenting his or her own “super unique” problems. Because all of the show’s singing technically takes place in Rebecca’s mind, this ensemble performance suggests Rebecca is finally realizing that other people have always had their own issues—a noteworthy act of empathy on her part that illustrates how much she has changed.





From this point on, Rebecca takes a step back in the musical numbers, and the show offers six consecutive episodes in which she never sings the lead. Instead, fan-favorite characters who have previously been sidelined are given their own songs, with Jim (Burl Moseley) and George (Danny Jolles) starring in the kinds of slickly choreographed, elaborately costumed performances that Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is beloved for. “What U Missed While U Were PopUlar” sees George reflect on his high-school experience as a nerd, while Jim’s “Don’t Be a Lawyer” tears apart the notion of having a legal career (“There are so many other professions / That don’t turn you into Jeff Sessions,” goes one line.) That both of these songs, given their lyrics, could have once been performed by a miserable Rebecca only adds to the idea that she is seeking to move forward rather than dwell on the past.

That isn’t to say that Rebecca’s transition away from lead vocalist has been without its setbacks. Because her singing is intimately connected to her psychological well-being, her uneven journey of recovery is also mirrored in the musical numbers. When she faces rejection from a former flame, Greg (Skylar Astin), she slips back into her recognizable self-punishing behavior with “I’m Not Sad, You’re Sad,” a classic Rebecca-singing-to-the-camera solo number in which she snorts ibuprofen before drunkenly trying to have sex with her boss and Josh.

Although watching Rebecca return to old habits is frustrating, the audience also sees signs of her growing maturity. After the outburst, Rebecca goes to her therapist’s office in the hope of talking about her problems and seeking peace instead of chaos. Rebecca’s progress is also conveyed via throwbacks to songs from earlier in the series. In Season 2’s “The Math of Love Triangles,” Rebecca relished playing two love interests off each other; but in Season 4’s “The Math of Love Quadrangles,” which finds her torn among three men, she’s reluctant to get mired in the conflict. “I thought all this drama was back in my past,” she sings—a reminder that she is no longer the pill-tossing Rebecca of the pilot episode.

When it debuted, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend set itself apart from earlier TV musicals with its vivid sense of imagination and its willingness to celebrate, rather than explain away, the inherent ridiculousness of the genre. Given that the series became acclaimed, in part, for its Rebecca-fronted numbers, it’s been remarkable to see how the protagonist’s personal development has forced the show to evolve as well. As enjoyable as Rebecca’s performances are, in recent episodes, every one of them has been prompted by a return to her old behaviors; when she’s working to improve herself, other people get to take center stage.

This dynamic creates a dilemma for fans. It means that one possible outcome of Rebecca’s ongoing recovery is that she’ll stop imagining her life as a series of musical numbers. It might be fitting, then, that the show is concluding after Season 4, with Rebecca’s life seemingly on the upswing. Musical theater is, in many ways, escapism in its flashiest form, an indulgent departure from reality. As Rebecca continues to grow, she’ll begin to face life’s dramas in the real world, rather than on the private stage in her mind.



This story reveals the outcome of tonight’s Jeopardy episode.

Like many other articles on the internet today, this piece contains a spoiler about James Holzhauer, the Jeopardy contestant who has been winning money at a rate the show has never seen before.

If you’d rather not know how Holzhauer does on tonight’s episode, you should stop reading now.

The spoiler, as you may have guessed: Holzhauer’s winning streak is over. News of his loss started circulating over the weekend, and The New York Times, The Washington Post, and other outlets piled on Monday morning. Their coy headlines—the Times’ was “What Is a Spoiler? This Story About ‘Jeopardy!’ Phenom James Holzhauer”—ostensibly hid the outcome of tonight’s show, but their use of the word spoiler no doubt indicated to some readers that Holzhauer’s 32-game streak had ended.

Of course, spoiler could also have been hinting at a Holzhauer win, seeing as tonight had the potential to be a milestone for him. Going into this game, he had cumulative winnings of $2,462,216 on the show—only about $60,000 short of what Ken Jennings had won during his 74-game streak in 2004. Had Holzhauer won tonight, it’s likely that he would have broken Jennings’s record, given that Holzhauer had been averaging about $75,000 in winnings a night.

The leak of tonight’s result reveals the quirks of taping a TV show such as Jeopardy in advance. Andy Saunders, who runs the blog The Jeopardy! Fan, told me that each night’s episode of the show is typically distributed to local TV stations the weekday before—meaning that tonight’s episode would have been in the hands of countless producers by last Friday evening. So, Saunders guesses, it was an employee of a local station who put the entirety of the episode online this weekend. (Jeopardy did not respond to a request for details about how the show is distributed and might have been leaked.)

Holzhauer’s loss actually took place well before Friday evening—it was taped on March 12. Even though the episode’s result came to light before being aired, it’s impressive that producers, contestants, audience members, and (presumably) their loved ones all kept quiet for months. Jeopardy wouldn’t tell me anything about the protocols it has in place to prevent leaks, but Saunders said the show has contestants sign nondisclosure agreements, and asks members of the studio audience not to blab. They usually don’t, he said, out of “respect for the show and the process.”

Holzhauer’s departure will probably restore some normalcy to Jeopardy: Fewer games will be settled before the program’s final round, scores will be lower, and, in all likelihood, fewer people will care if the results are leaked.



The sight of eight co-champions hoisting the ceramic trophy at the Scripps National Spelling Bee last night was a remarkable ending to a competition that the ESPN announcers kept referring to as “historic” and “unprecedented.” This year’s Bee was certainly one for the history books: There had never been more than two spellers sharing the top honor before this. Those elite eight—quickly dubbed the “Octochamps”—will be remembered for irrevocably altering the competition. A recent documentary on competitive spelling (particularly focusing on the dominance of Indian American kids in recent years) is titled Breaking the Bee. The Octochamps actually broke it this time.



As the quality of the top contestants at the national bee has ramped up dramatically in recent years, Scripps has struggled to keep pace. For three straight years, from 2014 to 2016, the final round ended in a two-way tie, after the co-champions exhausted the championship word list—a list of 25 of the most challenging words kept in reserve for the end of the competition. Scripps changed the rules in 2017, instituting a written test that would be used as a final tiebreaker. This year, they announced they were ditching the tiebreaker test, again allowing for co-champions. But the rules contemplated only the possibility of up to three spellers still battling it out at the end, certainly not eight.



Early yesterday, it became obvious that this year’s crop of competitors had broken through to a new level of orthographic aptitude. Fifty spellers—out of a total of 565 middle schoolers—had qualified for the early final rounds. (The number of contestants at nationals had swelled thanks to a new pay-to-play program called RSVBee, which allows spellers to qualify even if they haven’t won a regional spelling bee—as long as they pony up the $1,500 fee to attend and pay for their own travel and hotel accommodations. This year, 292 contestants came to the nationals that way.)



The final 50 who started the day were expected to get through the initial rounds by about 2 p.m., when the field was supposed to be whittled down to the 15 or so who would advance to the evening showdown televised on ESPN. As the clock crept toward 3:30, 25 spellers were still going strong, necessitating a killer round with extremely challenging vocabulary to winnow the field. Nine spellers went out after misspelling such words as palatschinken (a thin egg-batter pancake stuffed with jam that traveled from Latin to Romanian to Hungarian to German to English) and yertchuk (an Australian eucalyptus tree plucked from an Aboriginal language). These are among the hardest words on offer from the Scripps Bee’s reference of record, Webster’s Third New International Dictionary Unabridged, which weighs in at 2,800 pages in print with some 476,000 entries. It has expanded even more in the online version, which spellers are now expected to consult.

Sixteen competitors survived that round and were able to rest for a few hours before the main event. And, once again, it was abundantly evident that these middle schoolers were going to blow past the carefully worked-out program. Bee officials were forced to develop a contingency plan to accommodate the possibility of multiple champions after seeing how the field was shaping up. “When we began to comprehend the mettle of our finalists, we began to think about what could possibly happen this evening,” Paige Kimble, the executive director of the bee, told the Associated Press. “We went into the evening with the plan that we executed on this evening.”



In the 15th round of the finals, Miami’s Simone Kaplan, a crowd favorite, misspelled tettigoniid (relating to a family of insects including long-horned grasshoppers). That left eight out of the original 16, who were still batting down words with aplomb. After two more rounds went by with no eliminations, the pronouncer, Jacques Bailly, made a special announcement. “Champion spellers, we are now in uncharted territory,” Bailly told them. “We do have plenty of words remaining on our list. But we will soon run out of words that will possibly challenge you, the most phenomenal collection of super-spellers in the history of this competition.”



That meant that whoever managed to spell words correctly over the course of three more rounds would earn a share of the championship. And at the end of a dramatic Round 20, not a single speller had fallen. Each of the eight got to celebrate as they escaped the dreaded ding of the bell. Their winning words give a sense of the stunning breadth of word knowledge that they brought with them.



Rishik Gandhasri of San Jose, California, spelled auslaut (the final sound in a word or syllable). Erin Howard of Huntsville, Alabama, spelled erysipelas (an acute skin infection). Saketh Sundar of Clarksville, Maryland, spelled bougainvillea (a tropical woody vine with brilliant flowers). Shruthika Padhy of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, spelled aiguillette (a military shoulder cord). Sohum Sukhatankar of Dallas spelled pendeloque (a pear-shaped glass pendant). Abhijay Kodali of Flower Mound, Texas, spelled palama (webbing on the feet of aquatic birds). Christopher Serrao of Whitehouse Station, New Jersey, spelled cernuous (drooping, as a flower). And Rohan Raja of Irving, Texas, spelled odylic (relating to a hypothetical life force conceived in the 19th century). Cue the confetti.



These obscurities were no match for the elite eight, because they had all trained on the most diabolical words to be found in Webster’s Third. Before this year’s bee, Merriam-Webster released an analysis conducted with the language-learning app Babbel that identified the types of words most commonly misspelled at the Scripps Bee. About 48 percent have roots in the classical languages of Greek and Latin, while French and German supply the most frequently misspelled words among modern languages. Yet the eight co-champions were never fazed by any of these linguistic wellsprings, and indeed seemed to be on friendly terms with loanwords derived from Portuguese, Sanskrit, Korean, Irish, and a host of other languages.



As documented in Breaking the Bee, as well as in Shalini Shankar’s new book, Beeline, the training regimen of these elite spellers allows them to zero in on the words that they need to know in order to succeed at both the regional and national levels of the bee. Most of the top competitors have personal coaches, and six out of the eight co-champs used study materials from SpellPundit, a company started by the Dasari family of Spring, Texas. Shobha Dasari, a high-school senior now headed to Stanford, and her younger brother, Shourav, are both recent Scripps finalists. As Shobha told the AP, “It’s all the spellers’ hard work. We just give them the words.”



It’s no wonder that at the end of the evening, the Scripps Twitter account broke the news of the eight-way tie as “Dictionary loses.” (Merriam-Webster followed up: “The Dictionary concedes and adds that it is SO. PROUD.”) But now that the Octochamps have soundly defeated the dictionary, what’s next? Scripps might try to rejigger the rules again, but it’s clear that the bee will never be the same.





When Game of Thrones ended its eight-year run on Sunday, the series finale, titled “The Iron Throne,” received a largely negative critical response. Many writers pointed out that the show’s last season had given up on the careful character-building of Thrones’ early days—a problem that, in truth, had started a few years back. The result was a seemingly rushed conclusion where multiple characters made poorly justified decisions and important story lines felt only halfway developed.

The show made plenty of mistakes in its final episode, but among the most significant was Thrones’ abrupt and uncharacteristic turn to moralizing—and its use of heavy-handed allusions to 20th-century history to do so. Characters who were once morally complicated, whose actions fit within well-developed personal motivations and fueled the show’s gripping political drama, became mechanisms to bring the story to a hasty, unearned conclusion. Characters like Daenerys Targaryen and Tyrion Lannister—previously complex and fully formed—became, in “The Iron Throne,” mere tools in the service of a plodding message about the dangers of totalitarianism.

The reliance on contemporary historical allegory pervades the entire first half of the final episode, but the most glaring instance comes about 10 minutes in, after characters have walked through rubble-strewn streets and debated the ethics of summarily executing prisoners of war. Daenerys enters the scene upon her dragon, descending from the darkened sky. It’s a visceral case study in dramatizing evil as authority, which is to say it’s cribbed from Triumph of the Will. Daenerys’s appearance mimics Adolf Hitler’s entry in Leni Riefenstahl’s 1935 propaganda film. The queen arrives on dragonback, he on an airplane. Both come from above, seemingly higher and mightier than the mortals watching. Daenerys dismounts and walks through the blasted hulk of the Red Keep’s gates, directly toward the camera. When the wings of her last living dragon spread out behind her as if they were her own, the message is clear: The dragon has awoken. Dany gazes upon serried ranks of soldiers, fires still burning over miles of city and ash falling from the sky. Somewhere on the way to becoming the dragon, she has left behind the medieval machinations of earlier seasons and adopted the manicured totalitarianism of 20th-century dictators as her own.

The dragon queen begins to speak of liberation and renewal and bloodshed in front of a cheering crowd of uniformed soldiers, standing at attention, the blood of innocents still on their spears. Her zealous defense of war crimes in the name of ideology could be a Nazi’s speech, or perhaps a leftist authoritarian’s. There’s certainly something of Joseph Stalin and Vladimir Lenin in her idea that people ought to be liberated, by force if necessary, even if it means death for thousands. “Women, men, and children have suffered too long beneath the wheel,” Daenerys proclaims. Over the heads of her soldiers, viewers see what liberation means: the wreck of King’s Landing, Daenerys with her dragon sigil on one side and the flesh-and-blood reptile on the other. Hitler’s banners were the same red and black with a circle in the center, containing an odd, swirled insignia. The sieg heils are replaced by the thudding of spears, the brownshirts by men in helmets and leather, but the effect is identical.

The parallels are in some ways fitting. Daenerys’s rhetoric has always had a brutal streak—she’s had no problem promising the death of enemies to her followers. But her guarantees of violent revolution had previously been couched in the character’s personal kindness and her repeated efforts not to become a reborn version of her pyromaniacal father. Perhaps unable to make her sudden moral downfall in Season 8 seem wholly organic, Game of Thrones opted to lean on dramatic visual cues. If the show could not sell viewers on Daenerys’s embrace of unambiguous villainy, it could at least tie her directly to Hitler, to Stalin, to dictators whose reigns are within living memory.

In earlier seasons, tyranny did not always look like tyranny. Few moments capture how elegantly Game of Thrones used to work like the ones in Season 2 when Tywin Lannister, one of television’s great villains, interacts with Arya Stark, who’s disguised as a servant. Tywin comes off as human, as a man concerned with his family and his legacy. He shows generosity, asks about his servant’s family, and treats her more gently than many of the series’s purported heroes might have. Such nuance extended to other characters, too: The often ruthless Stannis Baratheon practices a harsh but evenhanded form of justice. His late brother Robert, a drunkard and philanderer, still strove to act as a king and friend should, despite his constant failures. Even the murderous Roose Bolton’s and Walder Frey’s behavior was motivated by fundamentally human desires to improve their families’ lots. Viewers didn’t need fascist or Stalinist symbols to know when an action was vile, even if it came from a character who didn’t seem fully evil.

Things are simpler when viewers do not have to think about the people behind the evil. Game of Thrones used to ask its audience to think about those people, though. One episode in the show’s second season began with a seemingly random conversation between two soldiers guarding the Lannister army’s horses. They aren’t significant to the plot, but they get almost two minutes of screen time. They’re normal people who joke around—farting is involved—and laugh. And then they’re killed. The show often forced viewers to question its heroes not through cruelty and violence but through peace and humor. It was not the sudden death of the Lannister men that gave the scene its emotional heft but the ordinariness of what came before it.

That sort of nuance disappeared in later seasons. Even when the opposing side became sympathetic victims, they were not fleshed out with the same care as the Lannister soldiers were in the second season. The unsubtle imagery in Game of Thrones’ later seasons was aided by the show’s use of the Unsullied, Daenerys’s army of erstwhile slaves. Though they never really took on individual identities, the Unsullied had a story, and their very presence on the show made a point about who Daenerys was. But in Season 8, the Unsullied became an entity to be neatly organized and casually discarded. Their lack of individuality served the show’s thudding metaphors in “The Iron Throne.” The Unsullied’s faceless helms display no emotion but suggest total loyalty. The men slam their spears into the dirt in unison when Daenerys speaks. They are an authoritarian’s dream.

“The Iron Throne” doesn’t stop with the imagery of totalitarianism. Apparently concerned that some viewers might miss the parallels to 20th-century dictators, the show has Jon Snow, its morally upstanding and politically inept co-lead, join the now-imprisoned adviser Tyrion Lannister in his cell to fully explicate Daenerys’s transition to fascism. Tyrion asks Jon: “When you heard her talking to her soldiers, did she sound like someone who is done fighting?” Of course she didn’t, because dictators always need enemies. But in the past, Game of Thrones didn’t need to explain to viewers exactly what was happening. It presented well-shaded characters and morally unclear choices, then asked the audience to come to its own conclusions.

Tyrion continues: “When she murdered the slavers of Astapor, I’m sure no one but the slavers complained. After all, they were evil men. When she crucified hundreds of Meereenese nobles, who could argue? They were evil men. The Dothraki khals she burned alive? They would have done worse to her.” It’s impressive, really, that a character in a premodern fantasy reality is so well versed in postwar German confessional poetry: Tyrion’s words echo the Lutheran minister Martin Niemöller’s “First they came …” almost exactly. “First they came for the socialists, and I did not speak out— / Because I was not a socialist,” Niemöller said. First she came for the slavers of Astapor.

Niemöller’s words are famous for good reason; they tell simply and concisely how evil results from inaction. But Game of Thrones viewers were watching a 73-episode television series that had the luxury of showing exactly how horrifying bloodshed can result from the intention to make society better. Thrones once had faith that its depiction of a kingdom torn apart by petty squabbles and the indifference of wealthy autocrats resonated with viewers. Until the last season, the show didn’t feel the need to tell viewers how it resonated.

Of course, since its inception, Game of Thrones has referenced real-life history. The central conflict is inspired by the Wars of the Roses, the notorious Red Wedding was based on a 15th-century event called the “Black Dinner”—the list goes on. But such references have usually been to things outside of living memory. They’ve been to medieval or ancient events, and usually they were mined more for plot points or invented history, not to set up obvious ethical comparisons.

The show’s final act didn’t trust viewers the way the early seasons did. The audience didn’t need a fable about power to be wrapped in a bow and delivered in the form of 20th-century historical analogies. (Or maybe we did—maybe some of us have “become inured to the shoddy writing and plotting.”) In its first half, and perhaps even for a season or two after leaving Martin’s books behind, the show trusted its audience enough to avoid allegory and the simplistic morality that comes with it. It trusted that the audience knew right from wrong, and knew that both could coexist within a character. It asked viewers to find their own messages in a series about a faux-medieval world of dragons and ice zombies—and take them or leave them as they saw fit. It would have been better if the show had ended that way.



It might be Westeros’s heroes’ last night alive: Time for wine, time for conversation, and time for a song. When Tyrion Lannister called for music amid a fireside chat with comrades in the latest Game of Thrones episode, “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms,” it was the shy squire Podrick Payne who answered his call. “High in the halls of the kings who are gone,” he sang in an unexpectedly delicate, pretty voice, “Jenny would dance with her ghosts.”

Those words, from the second book of George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire series, compose the opening line of “Jenny of Oldstones,” a song that’s referenced throughout the Martin saga. In Westeros history, Jenny was a common woman whom Duncan Targaryen fell in love with and married, thus triggering a war (he’d been betrothed to a Baratheon princess) and abdicating his claim to the throne (making way for the line of succession that would lead to the fall of House Targaryen). Jenny believed herself to be descended from the First Men, the ancient race who first populated the continent.

Martin’s books didn’t specify the full lyrics of the song, but the showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss filled in the blanks for the latest Thrones episode. Podrick sings of Jenny dancing with the ghosts of those she’d loved and lost “through the day / And into the night through the snow that swept through the hall / From winter to summer and winter again / ’Til the walls did crumble and fall.” As he sings, viewers see a series of tender moments between characters amid preparation for humanity’s stand against the army of the dead.

The song’s slow and lilting melody was written by Ramin Djawadi, the composer for all of Thrones’ music, including the thrumming title theme and the string-laden episodic scores. Only a few other examples of lyrical (and diegetic) tunes have shown up previously on Thrones: “The Rains of Castamere,” the Lannister war song, and “The Bear and the Maiden Fair,” a bawdy drinking tune. I met with Djawadi last year for a glimpse at his process, and after hearing the new song—as well as its haunting cover by Florence and the Machine—I spoke with him again, this time about the musical material heard thus far in Thrones’ final season. This conversation has been edited.

Spencer Kornhaber: Tell me about your assignment for “Jenny of Oldstones.”

Ramin Djawadi: That came together like some of the other songs we’ve done in the past, like “Rains of Castamere.” The song was written into the show, so they needed this piece before they were shooting. Normally I come in after the episodes were shot. But this one, they gave me the lyrics and said, “Write us a song.”

Kornhaber: How do you approach writing a song with lyrics when most of your music is instrumental?

Djawadi: It’s definitely different because I already have something preexisting. I try to find the rhythm within the lyrics and put a melody to it where, when you sing the song, it just feels natural. A lot of times, you’d think the song comes first and then you put lyrics to it, but there are definitely occasions—Elton John being a very famous example—where the lyrics exist before.

Kornhaber: So you read the lyrics and hear music in them. How would you describe the mood, the tone, that you felt the words called for?

Djawadi: Definitely something somber. Obviously it’s the night before the big expected battle. It’s haunting and lonely. Those things that go on in your head when you think, Are we going to die? That’s what I was going for.

Kornhaber: Florence Welch said it reminded her of “a Celtic folk song.” When you’re writing a song that’s supposed to exist within the world of the show, do you look to any historical sources or styles of music that seem like what they’d be singing in Westeros?

Djawadi: Not really. In fact, it’s quite the opposite. We’ve done it with the score as well: I try to stay away from something that you might expect from a medieval time. Obviously it can’t be a song that’s so contemporary in terms of harmony and melody that it feels completely out of place. But also I don’t want to write it specifically, stylistically, for medieval times. I just try to come up with a melody that is hummable and memorable.

I love [Welch’s] version of it. It’s beautifully performed. The version I sent to her was very stripped down, and she did an amazing interpretation.

Kornhaber: What did you think of the voice of Daniel Portman, the actor who plays Podrick?

Djawadi: I was really impressed. His version is very toned down and, in fact, the harmonies in that version I simplified even more from how I originally had written the song. I almost wanted him to sing it a cappella. Florence’s version is like I originally wrote it, with more chord changes.

Kornhaber: Do you think the lyrics are reflecting anything going on in the show, or is this just the song that happened to come into Podrick’s mind?

Djawadi: That’s open to interpretation, right? Clearly the relationship dilemma with Jon and Daenerys you could relate to Duncan and Jenny. Now that [Jon] knows who he is, and Dany knows who he is, you can draw a comparison to the conflict or the decision to come.

Kornhaber: The other powerful musical moment in that episode came with Brienne’s knighting. What are we hearing in that scene?

Djawadi: That is actually a theme that we had used for Jaime and Brienne before: the “Honor” theme. We’ve used it in other moments when somebody does something honorable, [like] when the Hound buries the bodies in that house [in Season 7, Episode 1]. It’s one of my favorites. It’s such a beautiful and emotional theme we don’t get to use as much.

Kornhaber: So it’s a theme tied not to a character but rather to an abstract concept. What are the show’s other themes like that?

Djawadi: One we had kind of became the Littlefinger theme. We called it the “Conspiracy” theme. In the early seasons, there was a lot of backstabbing going on—I guess it’s the opposite of the “Honor” theme.

Kornhaber: Jon and Daenerys have their “Love” theme, which came out in the dragon-riding portion of the season premiere.

Djawadi: That was just a fun scene. It’s playful in a way, but also very powerful because he’s learning to ride the dragon. The arrangement was big, with percussion. There’s a hint of danger.

What was interesting in Episode 1 was that a lot of the themes had callbacks to Season 1. For example, when Bran and Jaime meet at the very end of the episode, that definitely is a callback to the original, from their first interaction. Jon and Dany arriving at the beginning with their army was a callback to the king’s arrival from Season 1. Obviously the footage is very similar—how everybody in Winterfell was lined up—so we drew similarities to the original cue there.

Kornhaber: Did you write any other original songs for this last season?

Djawadi: Every season, I’ve developed existing themes, and there’s always been room to write some new material and new themes. We definitely have that as well this season. I can say that much.

Kornhaber: Have any of those new themes shown up in these two episodes?

Djawadi: I don’t think so. It’s coming.



On tonight’s episode of Jeopardy, James Holzhauer’s winning streak finally came to an end. Before he was stymied by Emma Boettcher, a librarian from Chicago, Holzhauer had chipped away at Jeopardy’s prize budget at an unprecedented rate, collecting nearly $2.5 million over the course of 32 episodes.

One key to Boettcher’s success was that she claimed both Daily Doubles in the show’s second round, depriving Holzhauer of the chance to bet large sums and pull away from his competitors, as he’d gotten used to doing in previous games. For the first time ever, he entered the show’s final round trailing one of his opponents.

“By the time Final Jeopardy rolled around I knew my goose was cooked if Emma answered correctly,” Holzhauer wrote to me in an email. “It’s a little like needing a team to miss a last-second field goal—nothing you can really do but watch. I made peace with my fate before the clue for Final was even revealed.”

It was an unfortunate night for Holzhauer to lose. Before facing Boettcher, he had been winning roughly $77,000 an episode on average, and if he’d kept up that pace tonight, he would have taken the title for highest regular-season winnings on the show, a record Ken Jennings set in 2004. Instead, Holzhauer fell short of Jennings by only about $60,000.

But even if Holzhauer didn’t break that particular record, he set plenty of others during his run. Before he went on the show, the most money ever won by a contestant on a single day of Jeopardy was $77,000. Holzhauer shattered that record, winning $131,127 on his best day, and exceeded it on 15 other occasions. (He now holds 21 of the top 25 spots on the show’s list of the highest single-day winnings.)

One reason Holzhauer was able to win so much money each game was his willingness to place large (by Jeopardy’s usual standards) wagers on Daily Doubles—his average bet was roughly $9,000, nearly triple what Jennings averaged over 33 games. One vulnerability of this tactic, as Holzhauer told me previously, was that a wrong answer could wipe out his winnings.

But Boettcher didn’t even give him a chance for such a wipeout. Holzhauer found the first Daily Double on the very first clue of the game, and finished the first round in the lead. Boettcher, though, wrested control of the board for enough of Double Jeopardy to get both of that round’s Daily Doubles, which she turned into gains of $7,600 and $3,000.

Still, Holzhauer performed well—he didn’t give an incorrect response the whole episode. “It just shows how difficult it is to win a sustained amount of games and a large amount of money on Jeopardy,” says Andy Saunders, who runs the site The Jeopardy! Fan. “James didn’t make any mistakes in this game and yet he still lost.”

In Saunders’s assessment, Holzhauer’s tactics were sound; he just got unlucky. “Emma happened to be reasonably good on the signaling device”—buzzer timing is crucial to Jeopardy success—“and she kept close enough [to Holzhauer’s score], and she was the fortunate one to find the Daily Doubles,” Saunders told me. “And that’s Jeopardy sometimes.”

Without his usual Daily Doubles, Holzhauer entered Final Jeopardy with $23,400, behind Boettcher’s $26,600. Boettcher bet $20,201, guaranteeing that she’d end up ahead of Holzhauer if she wrote the correct response; Holzhauer bet $1,399, so that even with an incorrect response he’d remain ahead of Jay Sexton, the third-place player going into the final round. All three players provided correct responses, and Boettcher ended up with $46,801—not quite a Holzhauer-esque score, but enough for a commanding victory (and one that merited a high five from Holzhauer).

When I asked Holzhauer how he felt about his run, he said, “My only real goals were: Win $110,914 on an episode to honor my daughter’s birthday, and play my absolute best every game. I achieved both, and I’m very proud of myself for that.”

Boettcher, meanwhile, has her work cut out for her—she’s just $2,473,899 away from overtaking Jennings’s record herself.



“Kwame Brathwaite. archive.” In just three words, Rihanna shared with her Instagram and Twitter followers the inspiration behind her debut fashion line, Fenty. Accompanying the caption was a vintage photograph—taken by the Brooklyn-born documentary photographer Kwame Brathwaite—of three stylish black women models, one donning an elaborate head wrap and two sporting Afros. The banner on the wall behind them reads Buy Black in bold block letters. Later that day, Vogue Australia published an interview with Rihanna that gave context to the beauty and fashion mogul’s post.

“When I was coming up with the concept for this release,” she said, “we were just digging and digging, and we came up with these images—they made me feel they were relevant to what we are doing right now.” She then mentioned that my own research on Brathwaite had offered her a critical introduction to his work. As someone who has written about Brathwaite’s life and career, I can see why Rihanna was drawn to his archive. His photographs of the Grandassa Models, one of the first troupes of curvy, natural-haired black models in the United States—who also designed their own African-inspired garments—celebrate the same pioneering spirit and black-fashion aesthetic as Fenty.

Kwame Brathwaite. archive.

A post shared by  badgalriri (@badgalriri) on May 29, 2019 at 4:06am PDT

The first new maison in France’s LVMH empire since 1987, Fenty is also the luxury conglomerate’s first house to ever be created by a black woman. The line was launched for the general public last week, days after an exclusive pop-up event in Paris. Described by Rihanna as “strong and edgy,” the collection features a minimalist color palette, short hemlines, bold shoulders, corsets galore, and statement accessories. Those who are familiar with 1990s American fashion history can see in Fenty the volume of April Walker’s Walker Wear hoodies, the androgyny of J.Lo by Jennifer Lopez’s velour tracksuits, the “ghetto fabulous” bling of the rapper Eve’s Fetish handbags, and the feminine glam of Kimora Lee Simmons’s Baby Phat.

But many critics were hoping for the garments to be more than luxury versions of ’90s-streetwear throwbacks—an aesthetic that has pervaded high-fashion runways in recent years, thanks to designers such as Virgil Abloh, Kanye West, and Shayne Oliver of Hood by Air. Early reviews of Fenty have been mixed, with some criticizing the price points and others proclaiming that the line is as badass as Rihanna herself. However, Fenty’s explicit references to Brathwaite suggest that Rihanna wants to create more than just flashy garments: She’s building a black-centered business model with the potential to elevate designers of color and reimagine the ideal luxury customer.

Rihanna and her team, including the style director Jahleel Weaver, seem to have recognized that Fenty needed a story for the brand that was not only fresh enough to appeal to younger fashionistas, but also weighty enough to place the garments within a broader stylistic heritage. Luxury-fashion houses use such narratives to paint a three-dimensional world—and a lifestyle—that’s alluring to consumers, while giving institutions an identity not tied to any one creative director. Compelling stories also give the clothes an intrinsic worth, making them collection pieces that hold their value over decades, which is what has historically separated the luxury market from the ephemerality of “mid-market” and “fast” fashion. The challenge for Fenty was to operate within the recognized customs of luxury while also disrupting the establishment in ways that felt true to Rihanna’s image.

Enter Brathwaite and the Grandassa Models. Now 81, Brathwaite was virtually unknown outside of Harlem’s black-nationalist community until 2014, when his family began working to make his photo archive public. Brathwaite quickly became the toast of the fine-arts world and an icon for many in black Hollywood. The son of a Barbadian tailor and a homemaker, a teenaged Brathwaite co-founded the Harlem-based African Jazz-Art Society and Studios in 1956 and, six years later, the Grandassa Models. Brathwaite and his crew translated the teachings of the Jamaican intellectual Marcus Garvey—and those of his lesser-known protégé, Carlos Cooks, the leader of the African Nationalist Pioneer Movement—for the hip, young jazz lovers of their generation. The Grandassa fashion shows, called “Naturally” and depicted in the 1967 photo on Rihanna’s Instagram post, helped to popularize the phrase Black is beautiful.

By fusing the Fenty brand with Brathwaite’s vibrant work, Rihanna is positioning herself as an incisive student of fashion history. The debut line’s website imbricates photos of Fenty garments with those of Brathwaite, making visible an entire ecosystem of style—with its own taste, culture, icons, fabrication techniques, and so forth—that has largely been ignored by the Western luxury-fashion industry. Haute-couture designers, instead, often scour black communities around the globe for the latest streetwear looks to slap their brand on; the Marc Jacobs dreadlock debacle and Kylie Jenner’s alleged theft of the black-owned indie brand Plugged NYC’s looks are just two recent examples.

As a cultural critic, I’ve observed this process: First, designers attempt to “elevate” garments, pilfered from black folks, to the realm of high fashion by putting the clothes on white models. Next, they create a narrative aimed at white (European) consumers that dislocates the garment (or hairstyle) from the community that innovated the look. Then, they force those same marginalized people to imagine themselves in the white world that designers have created for their clothes. With Fenty, Rihanna is upending this practice of appropriation by placing black diasporic fashion history center stage. Thus, Brathwaite is more than a muse; he’s a cultural and political nexus around whom the Fenty world is constructed.

Most immediately, this marriage gives Fenty’s garments a kind of ethnographic richness and creative depth. Because of the Brathwaite-grounded origin story, I can now see in the clothing references to the zoot-suit culture of the 1940s; the styling of the 1950s South African group the Manhattan Brothers, in their dapper suits and Florsheim shoes, and the seductive sheath dresses of the lead vocalist Miriam Makeba; Bob Marley in the denim-on-denim look he popularized in the 1970s; and the “around-the-way girl” wardrobe of the singer Mary J. Blige in the early 1990s. But, and perhaps more importantly, I see influences from Rihanna’s Caribbean upbringing: the bare legs of everyday Barbadian women who were rocking short skirts and pum-pum shorts long before the Western fashion world called them “miniskirts” and “hot pants.” Rihanna drapes these childhood memories in the most decadent fabrics, stitched by some of the most skilled couturiers in the world.

In the long term, Rihanna’s business model for Fenty has the potential to reimagine what luxury looks like and whom it is for. Weaver recently told T: The New York Times Style Magazine: “Luxury has been defined in the past as one woman … You know who the Saint Laurent woman is; you understood who the Céline woman was.” Unfortunately, this “woman” (or ideal consumer) was imagined, either intentionally or by default, to be a wealthy white European woman. The promulgation of such an archetype has created a form of gatekeeping, in part through lifestyle policing and racial profiling in high-end stores, that bars many people of color from participating in the Western luxury market (despite the fact that African Americans alone have an estimated buying power of $1.2 trillion). Fenty, by contrast, uses a direct-to-consumer model, which bypasses the in-store experience altogether. And Fenty has established a talent “hub,” which seeks to cultivate young designers and tastemakers of color who wouldn’t typically be part of the usual pipeline into fashion’s upper echelon (one of Kanye West’s long-standing gripes).

It appears that Rihanna may already be thinking about the possibilities of a diffusion line, which would make Fenty available at lower price points. Rihanna—a woman from working-class roots who still remembers how she had to save up for months to afford a pair of Timberland boots—has said that one of her first questions about the cost of luxury was: “So how much is this gonna cost at retail? How can we bring the price down without compromising on quality?”

Luxury fashion is changing. Rihanna cannot, and frankly should not have to, revolutionize the industry on her own. But it is admittedly thrilling for many fashion fans to see the kind of world a black woman can build—and the rich, overlooked history she can tap into—when she’s given artistic autonomy.



Editor's Note: Read more stories in our series about women and political power.

When The Atlantic was founded in 1857, the U.S. comprised 31 states and eight territories. Women didn’t have the right to vote in any of them. But they were already fighting to change that: Suffrage had been adopted, over protest, as a tenet of the women’s-rights movement at the Seneca Falls Convention nine years earlier and thereafter became the focus of annual national conventions, public addresses, petition campaigns, and a slate of newly formed organizations in the lead-up to the Civil War. Those efforts went unmentioned in The Atlantic’s early issues, however; the magazine’s coverage of American politics was dominated by the issues of slavery and industrial-labor conditions.

Only around the turn of the 20th century, after national suffrage organizations had been formed and the movement had won victories in a smattering of states and territories, did the debate over women’s suffrage take hold in The Atlantic. Contributors—half of them men—detailed how the fight for the vote fit into the broader women’s-rights movement and considered how suffrage would affect roles in the home and family, what impact it would have on the nation’s politics, how many women would actually make use of the right to vote if they won it, and even whether women really wanted the right at all.

When the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified, in 1920, after decades of debate, protest, and legal struggle, it was mentioned in the magazine only as a cynical afterthought in a January 1921 article reviewing the events of the previous year. “The Prohibition Amendment became effective in January, and the Woman Suffrage Amendment in August,” a male contributor wrote. “The tail promises to wag the dog.”

“Woman Suffrage, Pro and Con,” by Charles Worcester ClarkMarch 1890

Clark framed the fight for suffrage within gender roles in American life. “For self-evident physical reasons,” he argued, men belonged in the public sphere and women in the private one. He presented the suffrage movement as “largely the result of an unnatural, and it is to be hoped temporary, state of human society,” in which women worked outside of the “peculiar offices” of the home and enter the public sphere. He believed that the decision to grant women the right to vote should be made with that broader context in mind; not “to establish her equality, not to satisfy the importunity of any special class, not to carry any particular legislation,” but only out of the belief that women’s “active participation in government” would benefit “society as a whole.”



“Why Women Do Not Wish the Suffrage,” by Lyman AbbottSeptember 1903

Abbott, too, considered women’s suffrage in relation to their traditional roles in the home—what he called their “higher work.” He described family as the center around which all questions of gender and governance turned; it was, he wrote, the source of men’s and women’s “inherent, temperamental, functional” differences,  “the basis of society,” and “the end of life.” He asserted that men served the family by doing “that battling with the elements which wrests livelihood from a reluctant or resisting Nature”—working—and “that battling with the enemies of society”: participating in the military and in public life. Voting fit into that role. Women, by contrast, served the family by caring for it directly. Voting, he wrote, would detract from that role by redirecting women’s energies to the public pursuits of men. For that reason, he argued, women “do not wish to have the ballot thrust upon them.”

“Woman Suffrage in the Tenements,” by Elizabeth McCrackenDecember 1905

McCracken was the first woman to write about women’s suffrage for The Atlantic, and the first to engage with the issue in more than hypothetical terms. She detailed her own experiences helping register women to vote for a school-committee election in a Boston tenement district. One of McCracken’s co-workers, she recalled, had asked her to help teach women about the process and encourage them to cast their votes, saying that it would be a simple task. But McCracken wrote that it was not simple at all. She recounted how her efforts to register and educate the district’s women drew her into their complicated and overburdened lives and, ultimately, led her to conclude that they “are not ready” for the ballot. “They must do so many other things first,” she wrote. “Before we put the suffrage question to them before we hold out the ballot, either as a theory or as a fact, shall we not help them with those things?”

“Why American Mothers Fail,” by Anna A. RogersMarch 1908

Rogers focused her case against suffrage entirely on the value of motherhood and the argument that granting women the right to vote would compromise that value. The work of mothers, she contended, was both removed from the realm of politics and essential to it. “A successful mother … is a more important factor in a municipality than any merely successful man in it,” she wrote, because mothers were responsible for raising and educating all the municipality’s citizens. In that way, she argued, mothers shaped the votes of the sons, brothers, and friends they cared for. If they strayed from their roles as caretakers by searching for some other pursuit or purpose, they could contribute to the very social ills they imagined their votes would correct.

“What It Means to Be an Enfranchised Woman,” by Ellis MeredithAugust 1908

In a rebuke to the arguments against suffrage that preceded her, Meredith laid out a stirring case for women’s right to vote. She observed that critics held enfranchised women to an impossible standard, saying they were neglectful of their families when they engaged in politics and “unfit for the ballot” when they didn’t. “Nobody,” she pointed out, “questions the fitness of those who, having voted for a hundred and twenty-five years, have made reforms necessary in every state of the Union.” She argued that the only difference between men and women that was relevant to the discussion of suffrage was that men had been able to vote for much longer.

Two years after this article was published, Meredith became the first woman elected into political office in Denver, Colorado.

“The Woman’s War,” by Mary JohnstonApril 1910

“The Woman’s Movement did not begin to-day, or last night, or yesterday, or the day before yesterday,” Johnston wrote. “It began an uncertain number of millions of years ago. It began when first a primitive, asexual organism slipped almost unawares into a sexual method of reproduction.” The fight for women’s rights, in other words, was as old as women themselves. In an impassioned style reminiscent of her best-selling historical novels, Johnston made the case for female equality and laid out counterarguments for some of the common criticisms of the movement. She pointed out that women had made “able sovereigns” in the past, from Aspasia to Queen Elizabeth I to Catherine the Great, so “there is really no reason to suppose that in a democracy a woman would not do well as a town-councilor, as a member of the board of health, or even, at a pinch, as a mayor.” The “Woman’s War,” she wrote, would be long and difficult—but the ballot, and the political power that came with it, would be a valuable weapon.

“Feminist Intentions,” by W. L. GeorgeDecember 1913

“The following article was written in response to a request made by the Atlantic to Mr. George, a prominent spokesman of the Feminist movement in England, its storm-centre,” the magazine’s editors said in introducing this article in 1913, “to state quite clearly the terms upon which leaders of his party will be willing to negotiate for a lasting peace.” That framing, which presented feminists as combatants whom governments would have to reach a settlement with, echoed the tone of George’s own thoughts on “his party.” George described feminists as “promoters of a sex war” trying to fundamentally change attitudes toward women through a revolution. “While the Suffragists are content to attain immediate ends,” he wrote, “the Feminists are aiming at ultimate ends. They contend that it is unhealthy for the race that man should not recognize woman as his equal; that this makes him intolerant, brutal, selfish, and sentimentally insincere.” They would continue to appear before men as a “rival and a foe,” he wrote, until men stopped insisting that “women are inherently inferior to them” and started granting them equal opportunities “in every field of human activity.”

“Much Ado About Women,” by Edward S. MartinJanuary 1914

Martin responded to George’s article with a more inevitable view of feminist progress. He wrote that the feminist goals George described—the desire for a world where women “have a fair chance” and “a full, even share of all the education, all the power, all the good employments, and all the money that is in process of distribution”—was “only what any good and really earnest father wants for his daughters.” Gender dynamics, he argued, could not be “smashed” through “sex-wars,” nor could they be transformed more quickly than they were already being transformed by developing economic and social dynamics. He believed attitudes about women would be changed not by feminists but by “daily study in the ordinary course of domestic life.”

“Meditations on Votes for Women,” by Samuel McChord CrothersJuly 1914

Instead of tackling the question of suffrage directly, Crothers began his article by criticizing the nature of the debate that surrounded the issue. “There is a great amount of serious—and less serious—discussion,” he wrote, “but there seems to be a lack of meditation.” He suggested that, rather than immediately taking hard positions and defending them with exaggerations, strident cries, and ungentle voices, people should take the time to consider the issue fully and with an open mind. To encourage that kind of deeper meditation, he explored a series of considerations that he felt were often overlooked: “that equal suffrage is not the first step in an impending revolution, but only a necessary adjustment to a revolution that has already happened,” for one, and “that the lawless acts of certain English militants only prove that some women are wiser than some men.”

“The Jelly-Fish and Equal Suffrage,” by C. William BeebeJuly 1914

Beebe brought his expertise as a marine biologist to the issue of suffrage in a detailed exploration of gender dynamics in the animal kingdom. “If a democracy would survive there must be unity and coöperation in all its parts,” he wrote. “A false distribution of power produces an imperfect coöperation,—a superiority and a corresponding inferiority which promote a chaotic division of interest and a total and widespread inefficiency.” He argued that jellyfish, a species “close to the true centre which marks the divergence” of male and female traits, exemplified how different gendered traits proved valuable in different situations. The “specialization” of sex could be combined with a “thoughtful, respectful coöperation between the sexes” to create real equality, he wrote—just the sort of balance he thought essential to the survival of democracy.

“The Gentle Female and the Astute Statesman,” by Matilda Hall GardnerFebruary 1915

Months after joining the executive committee of the National Women’s Party, Gardner wrote for The Atlantic about the frustrating work that went into advocating for suffrage, recalling her own experiences lobbying congressmen for the vote. “A majority … of the legislators have given little or no thought to the subject,” she observed, and responded to questions about their position with prevarication and promises to honor the desires of their female constituents, trying to evade deeper discussion. The job of lobbyists, Gardner wrote, was to disarm them—to “be gentle and persistent; don’t be clever!” In this way they hoped to appeal to men who had been taught to be courteous to women, and to underestimate them. But under the courtesy and the evasions, Gardner recalled, the women often encountered an unwavering dedication to traditional gender roles, even as they forced the congressmen to see them as political actors.

“Do Women Want the Vote?,” by William M. BrayApril 1916

Bray, a Wisconsin state senator, brought the magazine back to the question of whether women truly wanted to vote—this time with evidence, recounted secondhand. He described a “test” conducted by an unnamed “would-be statesman” who confronted the issue of suffrage while campaigning for a state-Senate seat. To determine whether the women in his district supported the movement, the politician canvassed a selection of residents who “he thought would be most representative.” His results, Bray wrote, were unambiguous: “Not a single ward, city, or village in his district had returned a majority for suffrage.” The politician’s mother, a supporter of suffrage, wrote to urge him to “help women secure the ballot,” but he stood firm by the results of his canvass: In his time in office, Bray reported, he didn’t vote for equal suffrage once.

“On the Fence,” by Frances Parkinson KeyesFebruary 1920

The Nineteenth Amendment had been passed by Congress months earlier and was in the process of being ratified by the states, but Keyes, the wife of a U.S. senator who had voted for it, couldn’t decide whether she supported women’s suffrage or not. Women “are certainly ‘equal’ to men,” she observed; they had the time to vote, they could “acquire experience” in politics, and they were no more or less flawed as a group then male voters. She also argued that allowing women to vote would improve their economic independence and in that way help “average women” struggling with housework, child care, and medical troubles. But while she believed that “women can do—if they have to—everything that men can do,” she did not feel that the reverse was true, and she believed “the things women only can do” were “the greatest and most important in the whole world.” So, she said, she had been an “anti-suffragist my entire life”—but hoped, and maybe even expected, that newly enfranchised “average women” would prove her wrong.



Coverage of violent crime is a staple of American news, yet only a handful of stories capture the attention of the nation. Even fewer go on to inform the trajectory of American legal proceedings. The acclaimed filmmaker Ava DuVernay tackles one of the most significant criminal cases of the 1990s with her miniseries When They See Us, which premiered on Netflix on May 31. In four episodes, DuVernay provides the most complete account of the impact of the “Central Park Jogger” case on the lives of the defendants and their families.

On April 19, 1989, police found the body of a 28-year-old white woman in New York’s Central Park. She was covered in blood and nearly dead after a brutal sexual assault. Trisha Meili, the injured party, was not the only victim of the night’s horrific events. So, too, were Raymond Santana, Kevin Richardson, Korey Wise, Yusef Salaam, and Antron McCray—the kids, ages 14, 15, and 16, who were wrongfully convicted of her attack. Despite no DNA evidence, fingerprints, blood, or semen linking any of the black and brown boys to the crime, all five defendants grew up in prison, each one spending between six and 13 years behind bars.

When They See Us is primarily focused on the racist logic of the policing, court, and prison systems that cost the five defendants their childhood. The series also profoundly illuminates some inherent problems in American criminal justice from a range of perspectives. Viewers get an intimate glimpse of mothers, fathers, and siblings fighting for the freedom of their loved ones; law-enforcement authorities classifying these same boys as “animals”; and protesters on both sides holding signs, declaring It’s Not Open Season on Women or The Real Rapist in Court Today Is the New York Police and the D.A.

Ultimately, the hysteria surrounding the Central Park Jogger case gave rise to new language about black-youth crime, and to new laws that caused more children to stand trial as adults than at any other time in American history. When They See Us gets the audience closer to understanding why juvenile and adult prison populations exploded through the 1990s, and how the United States became home to the largest incarceration system in the world.



The series begins on the morning of April 19, introducing viewers to the five teenagers as they navigated an ordinary day in their Harlem neighborhood. McCray (played by Caleel Harris), a rising Little League star, discussed the Yankees with his father (Michael K. Williams). Richardson (Asante Blackk), a trumpet player, anticipated being named first chair as he walked home from school with his older sister. Meanwhile, Santana (Marquis Rodriguez) and Wise (Jharrel Jerome) seemed primarily occupied with impressing girls, as Salaam (Ethan Herisse) avoided a bully. By nighttime, the boys had entered Central Park together, along with 25 to 35 others—some of whom began throwing rocks at cars, harassing passersby, and beating up homeless people. When the police arrived, the crowd scattered. The officers managed to catch five boys during the chase, including Richardson and Santana, who were taken to the Central Park station for questioning.

Initially, the police prepared to charge the kids with unlawful assembly and refer them to the children’s court system. But New York District Attorney Linda Fairstein (Felicity Huffman) and investigators quickly concluded that the boys instead were Meili’s attackers and built a case around them, rather than conducting a full investigation. “Every young black male who was in the park last night is a suspect in the rape of that woman who is fighting for her life,” Huffman’s Fairstein says to NYPD officers. She called for the deployment of an “army of blue up on Harlem” and encouraged police to “stop every little thug you see.”

The police, investigators, and the press dubbed the boys’ actions in the park that night “wilding.” Two days after the remaining three suspects had been arrested, the New York Post portrayed “wilding” as “packs of bloodthirsty teens from the tenements, bursting with boredom and rage, roam[ing] the streets getting kicks from an evening of ultra-violence.” Soon the term became part of the national discourse, with the newscaster Tom Brokaw describing “wilding” as “rampaging in wolf packs and attacking people just for the fun of it” on NBC Nightly News. Peter Jennings of ABC named it “terror,” plain and simple.

The concept of “wilding” and the racist assumptions behind it made it seem plausible to law-enforcement authorities and the public that black and brown boys’ mischief could easily turn into violent rape. In When They See Us, viewers hear excerpts from the New York Post columnist Pete Hamill’s April 23 account. “They were coming downtown from a world of crack, welfare, guns, knives, indifference, and ignorance,” Hamill wrote, “and driven by a collective fury, brimming with the rippling energies of youth … they had only one goal: to smash, hurt, rob, stomp, rape.” For Hamill, “wilding” was an expression of class and racial hatred. “The enemies were rich. The enemies were white.” The implication was that “wilding” would destroy affluent, white New York if young black and brown boys and men were not severely punished. DuVernay reminds her audience that Donald Trump purchased $85,000 ads in New York City newspapers that screamed “BRING BACK THE DEATH PENALTY. BRING BACK OUR POLICE!”

Five years later, the animalistic premise of “wilding” that When They See Us so vividly illuminates received academic treatment. In his definitive 1995 Weekly Standard essay, “The Coming of the Super-Predators,” John DiLulio Jr.—then a politics and public-policy professor at Princeton—predicted that immediate demographic shifts would “unleash an army of young male predatory street criminals.” These chiefly black and brown youths were, according to DiLulio, “so impulsive, so remorseless, that [they] can kill, rape, maim, without giving it a second thought.” Politicians and the media seized on the “super-predator” idea, just as they had done with “wilding.” Three months after the release of DiLulio’s article, then–first lady Hillary Clinton famously called for authorities to bring “the kinds of kids who are called ‘super-predators,’ no conscience, no empathy … to heel.”

Amid the “super-predator” frenzy, nearly every state passed laws that made it easier to punish children as young as 13 as adults and, in some cases, sentence them to life without the possibility of parole. In 1998 alone, roughly 200,000 youths were put through the adult court system, and the majority of them were black. Sixteen-year-old Korey Wise was the only Central Park Five defendant to be tried as an adult, and the fourth episode of When They See Us is mainly told from his perspective. With an exceptional performance by Jharrel Jerome—who plays Wise both as a boy and as an adult, and imbues the role with empathy—the episode exposes the horrors children experience when they are locked up with adults. In one scene, for instance, a Rikers Island guard helps two prisoners orchestrate a violent attack against Wise. The teen then chooses to enter solitary confinement for his own protection.

These practices went even further in the mid-1990s. Though Trump’s 1989 call for the execution of the Central Park Five went unfulfilled, between the release of “The Coming of the Super-Predators” in 1995 and the Supreme Court’s Roper v. Simmons decision, which outlawed the death penalty for juveniles in 2005, 62 percent of the children placed on death row across the U.S. were black or Latino.

But by the late 1990s, it became clear that DiLulio’s “super-predators” were not, in fact, coming for blood. Youth violence had declined—not drastically increased—and a number of prominent criminologists discredited DiLulio’s data. He apologized in 2001 for “any unintended consequences.” A year later, after DNA evidence linked a serial rapist and murderer named Matias Reyes to Meili’s attack, the New York Supreme Court vacated the Central Park Five’s convictions. And in 2014, the court settled a civil case with the five men for $41 million. Nonetheless, the “super-predator” myth irrevocably altered the lives of McCray, Richardson, Salaam, Santana, Wise, and tens of thousands of youths and their families, with the proliferation of misguided state and federal policies.

Super-predator may now be seen as a dirty word (and indeed came to haunt Clinton during her 2016 presidential-election bid), but the “wilding” concept that emerged during the Central Park Jogger case is alive and well. The most recent usage came almost 30 years to the day of Meili’s rape, on April 17, 2019, after a reported 500 black youths in Chicago descended on Millennium Park, allegedly stealing from and harassing tourists. The local news described their actions as “wilding.” An official blamed “soft on crime” policies, warning of more “wilding” to come. As DuVernay’s strongest work to date, When They See Us should inspire people to recognize that crime-control policies and the racist ideas behind them must change. Otherwise, the history of the Central Park Five is likely to repeat itself.



The Other Americans begins with blood. In the first pages of the Pulitzer finalist Laila Lalami’s new novel, a Moroccan immigrant named Driss Guerraoui is struck by a vehicle one evening while leaving the diner he owns, near California’s Mojave Desert. The car speeds off, its driver either unconcerned—or, worse yet, satisfied.

Through the perspectives of nine alternating narrators, including Driss himself, Lalami threads together an account of the slain man’s journey to America and the life he toiled to build after his arrival. The first character introduced is Nora, Driss’s American-born daughter, who moves back to her hometown after her father’s suspicious death. Her thoughts are crisply relayed, her grief overwhelming in its clarity: “My father was killed on a spring night four years ago, while I sat in the corner booth of a new bistro in Oakland,” the novel opens. “Whenever I think about that moment, these two contradictory images come to me: my father struggling for breath on the cracked asphalt, and me drinking champagne with my roommate, Margo.”
After Nora’s initial recounting of the news, Lalami introduces her other narrators—among them, Jeremy, an old school friend of Nora’s, who is white; Efrain, an undocumented Mexican immigrant who witnessed the hit and run; Maryam, Driss’s wife; and Coleman, the black woman detective working Driss’s case.

The Other Americans is, on its face, a novel that traces the story of one immigrant family and the seemingly inexplicable tragedy that ruptures it. But through her many characters’ specific and overlapping perspectives, Lalami also questions the feasibility of any centralized American identity. None of the novel’s narrators, even those who are citizens, ever quite measures up to the expectations they feel their immediate community, or their country, has of them. They are too loud or too brown or too soft. Too different. Nobody is ever enough.

Thankfully, the distinctions between their reasons for feeling like outsiders are still important: Lalami doesn’t conflate Jeremy’s unease in some hypermasculine spaces, for example, with Efrain’s all-consuming fear of deportation. For readers with their own experiences of immigration, whether direct—such as Driss, Maryam, and Efrain—or via family, like Nora, perhaps some of Lalami’s core considerations will be familiar. As Nora and the other characters unravel the real story of Driss’s killing, Lalami weighs heavy questions: Will America ever live up to the dream it sells would-be immigrants around the world? Is it possible to belong in a country that so readily kills people like you? Who is sufficiently American?

These are difficult considerations, and a less skilled author might have produced an overly didactic text in the hope of exploring them. But Lalami largely avoids this impulse by imbuing her characters with a vitality that bridges the gaps between their identities and their interiority. They occupy a range of different social positions, but Lalami’s characters most often read like people, not avatars of representation. They are funny, cantankerous, and affecting. They keep secrets from one another, and, most thrillingly, from themselves. Her characters speak with distinct cadences. Together, the narrators sketch out a vision of a community shaken by Driss’s killing, and a family whose life in America always existed against a backdrop of similar violence.
One of the novel’s most poignant successes is how deftly Lalami builds a sense of inexorable terror as the characters recount their lives before Driss’s killing. His death was not, the book suggests, an isolated incident. Early in the text, Nora describes having witnessed a fire at the donut shop her parents opened when they first arrived in the United States after fleeing political violence in Casablanca. In the days following 9/11, the young Nora had ridden to work with her father to escape the onslaught of post-attack news:

We turned onto Kickapoo Trail to find Aladdin Donuts burning like a stack of hay. In a single motion, my father jumped out of the station wagon and pulled out his cell phone, just as Mr. Melendez at the 7-Eleven across the street came running toward us. “I called 911,” he said. He told us he’d been changing the paper in his cash register when he heard the sound of screeching tires. He’d thought nothing of it until the smell of smoke came drifting in through the doorway, a mix of gasoline, ash, melting plastic, and caramelizing syrup. Years later, a whiff of smoke, even if only from a beachside barbecue, can still conjure up my memories of the arson.

It’s a devastating image, an encapsulation of how easily some immigrants’ American Dream™ can be wrested away by people who believe in a singular vision of Americanness. Driss, and Nora for that matter, could have easily died in the attack on the family’s shop. The Other Americans references 9/11 often, the attack a bellwether for rising anti-Muslim sentiment in the country. The book was published in March and written well before then. But it’s a particularly jarring read now, in the days following the New York Post’s dangerous decontextualization of U.S. Representative Ilhan Omar’s comments about Islamophobia, as well as after the mosque shootings in New Zealand that left 50 Muslim worshippers dead last month. The threats facing the Guerraoui family, and people like them, are evergreen.

Throughout the novel, Lalami’s attention to contrast and contradiction is stunning. Her prose is incisive and lived-in, as though culled from decades of listening in on private conversations between older family members. In this, Nora’s chapters are the strongest. Through her voice, readers most clearly feel the central tension of the novel: the Guerraouis’ deep desire to belong to a country that vilifies people like them. (It’s worth noting that not all immigrant families depicted in the book hold particularly romantic views about the country; Lalami’s story lines will impress upon readers that the pursuit of safety is often a far more common motivator.)
For Nora, the fear stoked by the attack on her father’s shop, and by the deepening culture of anti-Muslim bias in California, has tainted even the most joyful California endeavors: trips to the beach. It’s easy to see, then, how a child traumatized by the experience might, years later, come to resent her parents’ investment in the country she’s beginning to see as a threat. Still, it’s no less heartbreaking when Nora explains this dissonance to Jeremy when he comes to visit the family after Driss’s death:

“I knew something terrible would happen. You remember his business was arsoned after September 11th? They never found out who did it. And then he put up a huge flag outside his restaurant, like he had to prove he was one of the good ones. I told him over and over that he should sell. But he refused, he loved it here. God only knows why.”

The novel does answer some of Nora’s questions, through Driss’s voice. After the donut-shop arson, Driss had worked to establish a sense of rhythm and safety for his family that the political upheaval of Casablanca denied them. He labored to establish his new diner as a friendly, all-American outpost. That he was later killed outside this flag-flying establishment is as much an indictment of his new community’s xenophobia as it is a personal tragedy.
To the extent that The Other Americans is a mystery or procedural, the novel does offer an answer to its central case, a nudge toward some small amount of justice. Even so, the book’s conclusion about American identity is a far more tenuous one than this legal resolution: For people on the country’s margins, particularly immigrants, no gesture of patriotism will ever be enough.



The last time country music produced the most popular song in America was 2005, when American Idol catapulted Carrie Underwood’s “Inside Your Heaven” to the peak of the Hot 100. Nashville’s drought at pop’s top will continue this week, technically, even though Ariana Grande’s reigning No. 1 was overtaken by a banjo-laden song about horses, cowboys, and porches.

That song, Lil Nas X’s “Old Town Road,” has profited from the very question of whether it is, in fact, country. In mid-March, the track by the then-19-year-old Atlantan appeared at No. 19 on the Billboard country charts, prompting certain Nashville pundits to protest; this was rap, not country, they argued. Billboard was convinced and kicked the song off the country charts. Publicity over that episode, the continued simmering of a social-media meme related to the song, and last week’s release of a remix featuring Billy Ray Cyrus has helped the song surge 14 spots on the Hot 100. Also contributing: “Old Town Road” has a nutty-sweet catchiness, and it represents the latest amazing performance of one of pop’s most reliable magic tricks.

Lil Nas X is both meme-maker and rapper, and the “Old Town Road” phenomenon drew on both skills. Over a loop of plucked banjo (sampled from a Nine Inch Nails instrumental), grounded with electronic claps and bass rumbles, and in a rolling, folksy cadence, he brags of his Buffalo Bill swag: “Cowboy hat from Gucci / Wrangler on my booty.” The music video, such as it is, is all clips of the Wild West–set video game Red Dead Redemption 2. On the app TikTok, teens have played the song over edited footage of themselves transforming from street wear to denim, plaid, and cowboy hats. Watch a compilation and the wacky routine takes on a dreamy rhythm. Poof—you’re George Strait, you’re Dolly Parton, you’re Paris Hilton in The Simple Life.

It’s a perfectly straightforward meme given what “Old Town Road” has come to represent: genre as plaything. The 2019 mixtape on which this song originally appeared is a collection of feisty, internet-steeped rap. “Old Town Road” is a digression, but only mildly so. In a familiar hip-hop ritual of announcing one’s greatness by listing stuff—cars, clothes, substances—Lil Nas X simply swapped in the sort of items you’d find at a Santa Fe boutique. He pushed his thin, hoarse voice into a strained evocation of outlaw singers, sampled some plucking worthy of an old Wells Fargo commercial, and sang about horses—but all on the way to a Kanye West refrain about invincibility: “Can’t nobody tell me nothin’.”

Some of the country-diehard pushback to the song has been about pure sound. “Country music is about stringed instruments, simple melodies, and vocal harmony,” the YouTube critic Grady Smith said in a Lil Nas X response video titled “That Ain’t Country.” But he went on to tell country at large to “take yourself more seriously than just letting anyone walk in [and] say something is country when it’s clearly not.” Others have rejected the song in harsher terms, saying its country classification comes from a “bigoted stereotype bred from the fact that horses and cowboy hats are referenced in the lyrics,” as Saving Country Music put it. Such arguments are oddly reminiscent of the cultural-appropriation charges that hip-hop fans have often had to level against interlopers to their genre. The common logic: You can’t just parachute in.

But the question of who has a right to claim country culture is not simple. Lil Nas X’s song follows other rappers who have presented themselves, for a song or two, as earthy rural workers (see Lil Tracy’s “Like a Farmer,” basically a prototype for “Old Town Road”). It comes amid a cultural boom semi-jokingly referred to as the “yee haw agenda,” which sees black people donning cowboy garb. This has been a fun aesthetic movement, but it’s also one that has spotlighted black Americans’ actual historical association with country music and rural life. Solange’s recent album, When I Get Home, for example, drew on the thriving tradition of black cowboys in her native Texas.

Meanwhile, in recent decades, country has borrowed more and more from hip-hop. There have been a smattering of collaborations between rappers and denim-swathed singers, but the larger trend has been for country stars to simply, themselves, rap. And when they do so, they’re often not just taking the formal technique of rhyming fast over a beat. They’re taking hip-hop’s lyrical tropes. Look to the exemplary “hick-hop” hit “This Is How We Roll” by Florida Georgia Line: “The mix in our drink’s a little stronger than you think,” “All up in my new Maybach,” and so on. They’re using the same sort of imagery as Rick Ross, just put into a backwoods context.

The flirtation between the two genres makes sense, because they’re fundamentally more similar than is often recognized. Both mainstreams of country and rap typically present themselves as highly tied to place and to realness, and artists in both love to express pride with lists of material possessions and hometown references. They’re genres of self-styled underdogs and go-it-alone types, but when they score a hit, what they end up selling is a portable, feel-great alter ego for anyone to try on. This means they’re vulnerable to their traditions being used as costumes, which can be an asset—but also a problem when it ends up distorting or undermining the original meaning.

What “Old Town Road” does is make this shape-shifting process super-duper explicit, right down to the video-game music video: Turn on the song and you’re playing as a heroic sharpshooter. Such imaginary makeovers aren’t just for fun, either. They can be coping strategies for life. Lil Nas X has said he wrote the song when he was at a place of total desperation while living at his sister’s house after having dropped out of college. The chorus (“I’m gonna take my horse to the old town road / I’m gonna ride till I can’t no more”) “was me saying, ‘I want to leave everything behind,’” he told Time. Or, as he tweeted, “just because old town road has funny lines doesn’t mean it’s parody. it has a theme. anybody with ears can tell i put some kind of effort into that song.”

Now Billy Ray Cyrus—who’s had a rocky relationship with the country establishment since 1992’s crossover hit “Achy Breaky Heart”—arrives to scramble the song’s alchemy a little bit more. He sings in a soulful groan that contrasts starkly with the reedy yelps of Lil Nas X’s original chorus. The results do sound more “Nashville,” but if Billboard takes the remix’s bait and reclassifies “Old Town Road” back on the country charts thanks to a white man’s involvement, get ready for renewed and justified cries of racist double standards. Still, the most fascinating change is in Cyrus’s new bridge. “Hat down, cross town, livin’ like a rock star,” he roars, before delivering a rather un-country image of riding down Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills in a Maserati. Living’ like a rock star: There it is, another music genre’s archetype of success added to the stew.

What does it mean that a rapper imagining himself to be a cowboy has brought in a country singer imagining himself to be a rock star? It means that “Old Town Road” represents artistic anarchy of the best kind, the kind that demolishes walls and pushes forward. To add a level, Cyrus quotes Post Malone’s 2017 No. 1 hit “Rockstar,” which culminated in a long history of rappers claiming a title previously reserved for the likes of Mick Jagger. And Malone, of course, forged a new and polarizing sound by importing folk affectations into Drake’s template. Meanwhile, the No. 1 song that “Old Town Road” dethroned, Ariana Grande’s “7 Rings,” is also a work of cultural costume-shopping: a white dance diva swiped phrasings once used to describe poverty and drug dealing so as to trill about her record sales. Country, rock, rap—these are all terms for distinct sounds with distinct lineages, and it’s fair to argue over their boundaries. Pop, where “Old Town Road” now reigns? That’s free range. Giddyup.



There are moments during Huge in France when you can perceive what the show might have been—a semi-satirical, semi-screwball comedy about the acute insanity of modern-day fame. The new eight-part Netflix series exists in a meta universe similar to HBO’s Entourage, in that it’s loosely based on the real experiences of an actor and comedian, Gad Elmaleh. The plight of the show’s Gad (he refers to himself in the third person, alors, c’est vraiment Gad) is that he’s a huge star. In France. In real life, this is also true for Elmaleh, who by most metrics is a bona fide celebrity: He has 1.8 million Instagram followers, he once sold out Paris’s Olympia theater for a record-breaking seven consecutive weeks, and his former partner is the granddaughter of Prince Rainier III of Monaco and Grace Kelly. In France, Elmaleh is Jerry Seinfeld. In America, though? If a celebrity lands in a city where no one has ever heard of him, does he make a sound?

These are the kinds of existential questions Huge in France is positioned to consider. In the show’s lightly fictionalized universe, the world-weary Gad is getting tired of constant adulation and anonymous sex with beautiful young women. His ennui crests during a montage in the first episode as a mournful Gad comes offstage to the screams of thousands of fans, plays piano in his dressing room, wanders disconsolately down the street while being pestered for selfies. “But what’s it for?” he asks his manager. When he gets a phone call from his ex-partner, Vivian (Erinn Hayes), asking him to sign over parental guardianship to his Los Angeles–based son, Luke (Jordan Ver Hoeve), Gad sees an opportunity: He’ll leave Paris, fly to L.A., reconnect with his child, and rediscover his raison d’être.

It’s at this point that Huge in France cleaves itself right down the middle and becomes two very distinct shows. In one, Gad navigates his way through life in the epicenter of the Western entertainment industry, adjusting to his new state of total anonymity and shrugging at the absurdities of gym culture, chili dogs, and Tyson Beckford underwear signings. Even at his most depressed, Gad has an unpredictable magnetism, seeming as out of place and vulnerable in his new landscape as a jambon beurre in a vegan juicery. Sighing and shuffling like a Gallic Droopy, he tries his best to acclimate and to bond with Luke, a 15-year-old aspiring model who wants nothing to do with him.

In the other show, Luke’s stepfather, Jason (Matthew Del Negro) attempts to revive his acting career while shepherding the teenager’s modeling hopes. The two strands of the series are so tonally different and so strangely incompatible that it feels as if the series’s creators—Elmaleh, Andrew Mogel, and Jarrad Paul—spliced two preexisting concepts together and hoped for the best. Jason’s story line is an absurdist, infantile comedy about show business, one that features a multiple-episode arc about pec implants and an elaborate foray into method acting. A brawny, humorless Stretch Armstrong in a sweaty tank top, Jason clings to his glory days of guest appearances on police procedurals. Vivian, who runs a lifestyle website funded by Gad’s child-support checks, has ordered Jason to abandon acting to focus on Luke’s career, but he can’t quite bear to quit.

Mogel and Paul co-wrote The D Train, a 2015 movie with James Marsden and Jack Black that my colleague Christopher Orr described as “bromedy meets gay panic.” They also co-created The Grinder, a more charming fish-out-of-water comedy starring Rob Lowe as a deluded actor convinced that his stint playing a lawyer on television has qualified him to practice law in real life. Huge in France has its moments, including two separate cameos from Jerry Seinfeld and a winning joke about mustache adhesive. But it’s hard to square the chasm between the philosophical comedy the show begins as and the discomfiting farce it becomes. Gad himself starts to feel like an afterthought in the second episode, which descends into a strange plot about sperm donation that’s chased by an American stand-up’s Comedy Store routine about penises around the world.
So much is wasted here: Elmaleh’s charisma and sense of timing, Del Negro’s commitment to his ridiculous character, the inexplicable comedy of Seinfeld squinting crankily into a FaceTime call. What’s really lost, though, is the opportunity to say something meaningful about fame. On one side of the show is a megastar readjusting to an existence without the currency of stardom and all that it affords. On the other is a never-was who’s transferred his thwarted ambitions to a teenager. What’s it for? Huge in France sets up the question, but it never seems compelled to try to answer it.



In the spring of 1999, I was in the exact target demographic for the Backstreet Boys: 15 years old, female, and very susceptible to intense celebrity crushes. At the time, the group—made up of AJ McLean, Kevin Richardson, Howie Dorough, Brian Littrell, and Nick Carter—was everywhere. Their second U.S. release, Millennium, which celebrates its 20th anniversary this month, set a number of records, including becoming the best-selling album of 1999. These accolades merely confirmed what I already knew on a visceral, spiritual, and hormonal level: that the Backstreet Boys were the greatest boy band ever (again, I was 15). I was, in every sense of the word, a committed fan. I played their music on repeat, I screamed at their concerts, and I had torn-out magazine photos taped to my bedroom wall.

After my homework was done, I’d spend hours in a spare bedroom of my family’s home in Tacoma, Washington, consuming as much Backstreet Boys–related content as possible. Using our dial-up connection, I scoured the internet for pixelated photo collections compiled and posted by fellow fans on unsophisticated websites. If memory serves, there was a lot of Comic Sans font on backgrounds of bright pink, neon green, and electric blue. Many of the same press images were copied and pasted over declarations of love, punctuated with rows of exclamation points. Some fans created more serious websites that featured reviews and analyses of songs, videos, and concert set lists, as well as news about the boys and everyone in their orbit.

Both on- and offline, I paid so much attention to the Backstreet Boys that I picked up on the key concepts that were being sold to me: Nick, Howie, Kevin, AJ, and Brian were dreamy, they were heartthrobs, and they would never break my heart. The choreographed routines, precise harmonies, pelvic thrusts, and posed photos (why so much squatting?) were all designed in service of this message. This recognition—that as a young fan, I was meant to merely be a cog in their celebrity machine—was surprisingly empowering. I felt as though I had discovered a secret, which in turn gave me the confidence to start engaging with the ideas and messages that the group presented.

One of my friends, Julianna, felt similarly. The two of us had met at a birthday party and bonded over our enthusiasm for the Backstreet Boys. We saw AJ as the tattooed bad boy who humped the floor in concert; Nick as the adorably handsome baby of the group who misused words in interviews; Brian as the jokester with a jaw sharper than AJ’s spiked hair; Kevin as the sullen big brother and oldest member; and Howie as the wide-eyed earnest one, who delivered lines such as “My name is Howie D. Howie doin’?” with a serious expression and a dapper wink.

Together, Julianna and I ventured into a small subset of the online fan community that, in addition to broadcasting adoration, wrote original jokes and commentary about the packaged persona each member embodied.

We launched our BSB humor site on January 1, 2000. I was 16 by then, and she was 17. We gave our project the name “Tight Like Cheese,” a reference to some of the bonus content available on the Backstreet Boys’ self-titled, first U.S. album.

By creating the site, Julianna and I immediately became part of something. To me, this period of time felt like the Wild West era of the internet. I, a teen girl, could saunter into a chat room (the online equivalent of a saloon) and announce my presence by slapping my hand on the bar (or by putting some HTML code into a file). I could declare that I belonged, and then, I … just did.

Within weeks of the launch, Julianna and I found our site endorsed and promoted by fellow fans all over the world. We weren’t the first BSB humor site, or the biggest (names such as Whodaman and Da Phat Farm will ring bells to others), but the trajectory we experienced was still remarkable. This was years before Tumblr, Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter made it easy to share and signal-boost favorite sites. Yet in the eight or so months that we were operational, Tight Like Cheese saw tens of thousands of visitors, and the guestbook held, to our shock, hundreds of comments. We were shaping the Backstreet Boys online space with the help of a whisper network of squealing fangirls.

The humor on Tight Like Cheese was, we thought, edgy—so edgy that Julianna and I wrote under nicknames (“Dees” and “Juje,” which rhymes with luge) and never revealed our true identities. I suspect that many people who knew us in real life during this time still don’t know about the site (or maybe they do now—surprise, high-school friends!). I have a limited number of screenshots thanks to internet archives and the Wayback Machine, and some of the jokes we made embarrass me now that I look back with adult sensibilities and a modern perspective. Not everything funny to a 16-year-old boy-band superfan stands the test of time.

That said, there are also many sections of the site of which I’m proud. They show more self-assuredness and imagination than I remember actually feeling as a teenager. We had no official ties to the BSB or anyone involved with them, yet we felt that, as self-aware and critically minded fans, we deserved to peek behind the curtain and see how everything came together. Since that was logistically impossible for two teens in the Pacific Northwest, Julianna and I turned to writing fiction. We speculated about the motivations, expectations, and feelings of the group members, none of whom we knew beyond what we could glean from their polished interview answers. After news about their former manager Lou Pearlman’s mistreatment of the group emerged (details continue to be revealed today), we wrote a mock advice column that satirized the grueling process the group had endured:

Perhaps it’s no coincidence that I now work as a writer publishing on the internet—though, to my knowledge, nothing I’ve produced has come close to garnering the same kind of enthusiastic response as Tight Like Cheese, or inspired even a fraction of the feedback.

The final entries in the site’s guestbook, while still mostly positive, are from visitors chastising me and Julianna for the lack of updates. After all, the whims and lives of teenagers are quick to change. Less than a year after launching the site, I had high-school graduation and college applications and sorority rush to think about. The momentum of the band’s fame, and the pace of our lives, changed just enough that we were no longer quite aligned. This particular phase of the Backstreet Boys’ fame, the Millennium era, waned, and their next album, Black & Blue, came out in November 2000, marking a shift in tone and status for the group.

In the past 19 years, the Backstreet Boys have released five more albums, and a number of details about their rise to fame and their subsequent lives have come out. The truth bears little resemblance to the glossy images that the group’s press team circulated via album covers and music videos, in which the members wore spotless, all-white outfits—a not-so-subtle nod to purity and innocence. While Tight Like Cheese’s brand of humor stemmed from our knowledge that the Backstreet Boys weren’t as perfect as they appeared, Julianna and I never came close to predicting some of the actual stories that later surfaced.

Richardson left the group in 2006, before returning in 2012. McLean has talked openly about battling addiction. In 2017, Carter was publicly accused of committing rape in 2003. (Carter denied the accusation, and the case was declined because the statute of limitations had passed). Reading these sorts of headlines as an adult always gives me pause, as though I’m bracing myself to experience how I might have felt seeing them as an obsessed teenager. If I still held these men on a pedestal, I might have felt personally let down or even shattered by such revelations. Mostly, though, I’m reminded that I didn’t know them at all, despite the time and energy I spent pretending otherwise.

The Backstreet Boys did, however, play a crucial role in one of my most important real-life relationships. Julianna, who is now an accountant, has been one of my closest friends for more than two decades now. In 2011, she flew 1,200 miles to visit me in California, where my husband and I were living while he attended grad school. During her stay, the two of us went to see the New Kids on the Block and the Backstreet Boys perform at the Honda Center in Anaheim. Julianna was seven months pregnant at the time, so when a ripple in the crowd told us that a Backstreet Boy was coming down a nearby aisle during one of the songs, she held back but encouraged me to join the throngs of other women trying to get closer.

I did just that, pushing forward and melting into the crowd while stretching my arms as far as they would go, channeling the 15-year-old fan I once was. The group member, whom I had only a few moments to see, since bodyguards were moving him back toward the stage, turned out to be Nick Carter. This was several years before the allegation against him came out, which is why my gut reaction wasn’t as complicated then as it would be now. At the time, I felt the way I did at my first Backstreet Boys concert, in 1998, when I threw a stuffed animal onto the stage and watched with delight as Brian Littrell picked it up and examined it. Never mind that Littrell, a 20-something man, had no use for the small panda bear I had lobbed at him. Both that moment, and the one I experienced at the 2011 concert, offered the intoxicating illusion of proximity.

The following day, I posted to Facebook:

Could I have done more productive things as a teenager? Sure. But should I have? I don’t think so. The time I spent on a seemingly frivolous project dedicated to bubblegum-pop performers was pivotal to discovering my voice and to understanding internet culture. I can’t say it better than Nick, Howie, AJ, Kevin, and Brian do on their single “Shape of My Heart,” when they sing, “Looking back on the things I’ve done / I was trying to be someone.”



How do you tell the story of the world’s greatest literary career when the literary part is a gaping hole, “a jigsaw puzzle for which most of the pieces are missing,” as one scholar put it? You get inventive, to put it charitably. All Is True, a new film directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, is the latest installment in a long line of highly creative Shakespeare portraiture. In his novel Nothing Like the Sun (which Harold Bloom, the Yale critic, judged the most astute biography of Shakespeare), Anthony Burgess portrays the bard as a bisexual engaged in affairs with the Earl of Southampton and a black female prostitute, his poetic powers entwined with his immense virility. Shakespeare in Love, one of the highest-grossing films of 1998 and the Academy Award winner for Best Picture, envisions him as a besotted heterosexual with writer’s block. Literary scholars, too, join in the imaginative quest to explain “how Shakespeare became Shakespeare,” as Harvard’s Stephen Greenblatt writes in Will in the World. He proceeds to conjure Shakespeare the schoolboy falling in love with language, and Shakespeare watching his first play—“imaginative leaps” that earned the book scholarly censure as “biographical fiction.”

In the star-studded yet curiously stagnant All Is True, Branagh gives us Shakespeare in retirement, returning to Stratford-upon-Avon to garden and bask in his success. The film is a textbook case of how portraitists of the bard spin a paucity of fact into fairy tale. Shakespeare’s acting and business activities are amply documented, but the vacuum that is his literary life makes mythologizing inevitable. Unlike other writers of the period, he left no paper trail in the form of educational records, letters, manuscripts, or records of payment for writing—though writing was, presumably, his main profession. Francis Beaumont, who died in 1616, was eulogized by his fellow poets and buried at Westminster Abbey. When Shakespeare died just seven weeks later, the literary world was silent—not a word, and no Westminster burial, though the plays and poems published under the name “Shakespeare” were by then widely known and praised.

The mystery has spawned a centuries-long quest for other possible authors of the plays—a quest that has focused on male writers until recently. Spurred on by a fascination with the playwright’s uncanny insights into women, doubters are now exploring female candidates, one of whom I examine in “Was Shakespeare a Woman?” The mystery has also forced biographers of the long-enshrined bard to resort to speculation, using the plays, court politics, and general descriptions of Elizabethan England to elaborate the recorded facts of Shakespeare’s life into the narrative of his presumed literary life. The subjunctive voice is everywhere: Shakespeare “could have,” “probably,” “surely,” “perhaps,” “must have,” and so on. Any problems that arise along the way are made to surrender to that which is unfathomable, his genius. In Soul of the Age, the Oxford scholar Jonathan Bate turns the absence of literary evidence into proof of the bard’s superior character: He had an “instinct for caution,” Bate argues, and a “track record of staying out of trouble” (a claim at odds with evidence of Shakespeare’s numerous run-ins with the law). In The Truth About William Shakespeare: Fact, Fiction and Modern Biographies, the British scholar David Ellis laments that all these speculations come at the risk of “a general lowering of intellectual standards and the degradation of the art of biography.”

All Is True, a bookend of sorts to Shakespeare in Love, sticks closely to the biographies and to the familiar narrative of Shakespeare (played by Branagh) as mythical, romantic genius. “Your soul has the whole world in it,” his daughter Susanna (Lydia Wilson) exclaims, in tune with the hagiographic spirit that pervades the film. After the Globe Theatre in London burns down in 1613, Shakespeare is shown abjuring his pen and returning to his hometown, where the locals greet him with reverence: “Such an honor!” (According to historical records, no townspeople actually recognized him as the great poet—not his friend Thomas Greene, who kept a diary while he stayed at Shakespeare’s home, and not even John Hall, Shakespeare’s son-in-law, who wrote excitedly in his diary about a visit from the poet Michael Drayton yet neglected to mention his own father-in-law.)

Shakespeare settles into his grand home, sharing awkward family dinners with two grown daughters, Susanna and Judith, and a wife he’s barely seen in years. He stares fondly at his coat of arms, an allusion to one well-known drama in his life—his status-seeking ambition to become a gentleman. He laps up the praise of the Earl of Southampton (Ian McKellen), who arrives hailing him as “God of poetry! God of truth!” (There is no evidence they ever knew each other.) Then he stomps around and moans a lot about his wife and daughters being ungrateful. “I have raised this family up! Through my genius I have brought fame and fortune to this house! Yes, my genius!”

Where did that genius come from? Or, as a starstruck boy asks him, “How do you know” everything? Geniuses tend to leave some trace of their intellectual formation. Mozart and Milton did. Even poets who predated Shakespeare, such as Petrarch and Dante, left records of their education. Scholars compensate for the lack of information in Shakespeare’s case with appeals to the wondrous power of his imagination. “Shakespeare was superhuman,” insisted Samuel Schoenbaum, a leading 20th-century Shakespeare scholar. The film repeats the scholarly refrain. “What I know … I have imagined,” says Branagh’s Shakespeare. Never mind that no one, however miraculous, can imagine his way into the range of book-learning that underpins the plays.

Sadly, resting on laurels doesn’t generate much plot momentum, so Branagh invents a subplot, reaching for ways to get literary themes into a life otherwise bereft of them. His Shakespeare becomes absorbed by grief for his son, Hamnet, who died nearly two decades earlier. “At the time, you wrote The Merry Wives of Windsor,” his wife (Judi Dench) reminds him. (That play was followed by another comedy—a notorious awkwardness for biographers.) Hamnet, viewers learn in the film, was a promising young poet, eager to emulate his father. Shakespeare carries around scraps of his son’s poetry, and in the twilight of his own career becomes ever more obsessed with them. “What a talent Hamnet could have been,” he keeps saying, until Judith (Kathryn Wilder), sick of being disparaged by her father, angrily reveals that the poems are actually hers. She let Hamnet take credit for them because Shakespeare wanted so badly to see genius in his boy. “So are they worthless now?” she asks her father. “They aren’t his,” he responds gloomily.

The twist displaces the authorship controversy surrounding Shakespeare onto an invented authorship controversy surrounding his children—and gives Branagh his chance to at least allude to the very relevant issue of how female authors get erased. The real Judith couldn’t so much as write her name; she signed documents with her mark. Branagh’s portrait of Shakespeare the blinkered father and husband, an egotist who disdains his daughters, inadvertently highlights perhaps the deepest puzzle in the mystery of his authorship, noted by readers for centuries now: How to account for his remarkable empathy for women?

No biographer has yet managed to explain how the playwright came to write such startlingly feminist works, sympathetic to women’s perspectives and to their defiance of male authority—not occasionally, but structurally and systemically across the oeuvre. Inevitably, they fall back on that mystical catchall: his genius. As the Cambridge scholar Juliet Dusinberre writes in Shakespeare and the Nature of Women, “Where in every other field understanding of Shakespeare’s art grows, reactions to his women continually recycle because critics are still immersed in preconceptions which Shakespeare discarded about the nature of women.”

For evidence of just such staleness, All Is True is worth seeing, but not for much else. The chasm the film opens up between Branagh’s Shakespeare—the Shakespeare of biographical myth—and the mind one encounters in the plays is yet another reminder of the incongruities at the heart of the reigning account of the playwright. Where is the intelligence brimming with knowledge of philosophy and astronomy, theology and the law, foreign languages, music, and diplomacy? The one that laughs at self-important men, lays bare the structures of misogyny, chides those who underestimate clever women? Branagh succeeds where he least intends to—in revealing that it’s nowhere in this film.



When Jeff Lindsay first wrote his Dexter novels, about a blood-spatter analyst who kills bad people in his spare time, he unintentionally kicked off a modern love affair with the fictionalized serial killer. In the years following Dexter Morgan’s televised debut on Showtime, humanizing portrayals of murderous antiheroes have increased. There’s the protagonist of Hannibal, whose artistic refinement drew an FBI agent to him. In a slightly different mold, there’s John Tavner of Amazon’s Patriot, a traumatized hitman who bungles jobs and would rather play music, and the titular character of HBO’s Barry, a reluctant gun for hire who just wants to act; these killers take lives grudgingly, as if murder were a monotonous day job. Viewers, in turn, get a relatable, largely genial protagonist to root for.

The writer Kim Young-ha recognizes, and challenges, this cultural sympathy for the serial killer with his recent collection of short stories, Diary of a Murderer. The four-parter, translated from Korean by Krys Lee, opens with a novella of the same name that follows an aging former serial killer, Kim Byeongsu, as he battles Alzheimer’s. Though Byeongsu murdered prodigiously in his prime, his weakened state now leaves him reliant on his adopted daughter, Eunhui. When a spate of murders hits their town, he becomes convinced that her boyfriend, Pak Jutae, is behind them and decides to kill him before any harm comes to Eunhui. The premise of a skilled, aging murderer unable to trust his own memories is a quirky spin on the moral quagmires that criminal antiheroes usually face.

Byeongsu is less apologetic about his crimes than his TV counterparts. While Dexter refers to his murderous side as his “dark passenger” and Barry would call himself an actor foremost, Byeongsu continually and proudly refers to himself as a serial killer. This pride, combined with his newfound vulnerability, makes him strangely magnetic; his attempts to sort through his memory in the midst of immediate danger are fascinating, much like watching a car accident unfold in real time. His desperate attempts to document his days elucidate the anger, fear, and frustration of dementia, often creating asides between the reader and author that the protagonist isn’t privy to. These moments can, at times, read humorously, undercutting the tenuous control he prides himself on exercising over his life.

Still, Byeongsu maintains a chilling detachment that’s often played for irony. His mission to protect his daughter, though a classic hero’s tale, is written off as mere obligation. Having made a promise not to harm Eunhui (moments before he murders her mother), he sticks to it: “I hated people who made empty promises, so I tried hard not to become that kind of person.” He’s dispassionate even when discussing his compassion toward animals. “Over the years, I’ve saved many lives,” he argues, “even if those lives belong to animals that don’t speak.” Kim complicates the reader’s understanding of what makes this killer “good”: Though largely harmless in his post-serial-killing days, he remains unapologetic about his psychopathy. His onscreen counterpart in the film adaptation of this story, Memoir of a Murderer, trades in this complexity for more standard antihero pabulum (his only desire is to keep Eunhui safe). Kim’s original, though, makes it harder to empathize with him.

Unlike Dexter, who is disturbed by his urge to kill, or Barry, who is uncomfortable with his talent for killing, Byeongsu’s frustration has more to do with the mental and physical limitations that keep him from being the effective murderer he knows he can be. His attitude toward killing is closer to Hannibal’s celebratory approach (though when we meet Byeongsu, he has few Hannibal-esque faculties remaining). A killer since age 16, he continued to murder out of the “hope for a more perfect pleasure.” He explains, “Each time I buried a victim, I repeated to myself: I can do better next time.”

This fixation isn’t limited to serial killers, and is most explicitly explored in the collection’s fourth and final story, “The Writer.” In it, the wealthy owner of a publishing house considers killing his ex-wife. He echoes Byeongsu when he says, “Planning a murder is a little like contemplating immigration. Once you start thinking about it, you can’t stop.” Obsession—that relatable character flaw—rather than a twisted morality, becomes the reader’s uneasy point of identification with Kim’s protagonists. A similarly myopic self-interest surfaces even within Kim’s most altruistic-seeming characters. In “Missing Child,” a father stubbornly searches for years for his missing son and is disappointed to realize that bringing him home is not enough to restore the happy family he imagined they were in the past.

What makes Byeongsu stand out from Kim’s other characters, however, is the charming curiosity with which he approaches life and his crippling condition. He reads poetry and cites philosophy texts, constantly challenging himself. After meeting Pak for the first time and being overcome with the recognition of a fellow serial killer, he references Jorge Luis Borges’s short story “The Other.” Later, in the middle of his murderous plotting, he muses, “It suddenly occurred to me: I might be jealous of Pak.” Killing is to Byeongsu a way to discover an authentic self. His fixation on the suspected younger killer doubles, per his Borges reference, as a fixation on a past version of himself.

Kim’s use of pastiche—diary entries, jotted-down notes, snippets from a recorder Byeongsu wears around his neck—to re-create Byeongsu’s interactions with his dementia draws readers deeply into the protagonist’s voice. This peripatetic self-awareness, patchworked together through his disease, makes him a compelling narrator. Hints of megalomania, such as his penchant for likening himself to tragic Greek heroes (“If Oedipus looks into the mirror, he’ll see me standing there”), allow for some paradox in this reading. But Kim manages to blindside even wary readers with a twist that recognizes the worst of Byeongsu’s fears about losing control.

“To an elderly serial killer, Alzheimer’s is life’s practical joke. No, it a hidden-camera prank show. Surprised you, right? Sorry. It’s only a joke,” Byeongsu notes bitterly, though not without wit. As he drifts in and out of his memories, readers’ various interpretations of the truth will act as a Rorschach test—assessing the limits of their faith in him. But Kim asks, compellingly, why readers might be so eager to believe him in the first place.



Every so often on the high-stakes cooking competition Chopped, contestants are handed a box of mystery ingredients—such as a can of tuna fish, a bag of gummy worms, and a handful of bitter melons—and asked to create something delicious. I can think of no better way to describe Pokémon: Detective Pikachu, a bizarre pileup of genres (noir, sci-fi, kid adventure) designed to immerse cinemagoers in the dense video-game universe of Pokémon. There’s absolutely no way it should go down smooth—but somehow, the director Rob Letterman’s take on a murder mystery starring an electric yellow CGI mouse-monster named Pikachu makes for a breezy good time at the theater.

No doubt, Detective Pikachu is primarily pitched at fans of the multipronged, decades-old Pokémon universe, which began as a series of video games and has since expanded to include an animated TV series, a popular card game, and a time-gobbling phone app. But even I, someone who grew up playing the games (not to brag, but I can tell my Raticates from my Rhyhorns), had no idea there was a whole separate spin-off game about the adorable franchise mascot, Pikachu, putting on a deerstalker cap and becoming a detective. Although the entire project may sound like a desperate boardroom pitch that would come years after the public had gotten sick of regular Pikachu movies—“What if this time, he’s a detective?”— this is only the first time someone’s tried to render the whole fantastic enterprise as a live-action theatrical film. It shouldn’t work. It shouldn’t even make sense! Somehow, it does.

Even nonfans might be familiar with the basic details of the Pokémon game through cultural osmosis. Pokémon are brightly colored elemental beasties, magical-looking lizards and birds and canines and rodents and the like, that possess specific powers; people use special devices called Pokéballs to capture them and pit them against one another in battle. Detective Pikachu throws most of that out the window—there’s not much battling going on, and our hero, Tim Goodman (played by Justice Smith), is an insurance agent who claims he outgrew his childhood dreams of Pokémon training years ago. That changes when Tim’s father, a gumshoe from the nearby metropolis Ryme City, dies in a fiery car crash. As Tim goes to settle his affairs, he runs into a wiseacre Pikachu (voiced by Ryan Reynolds) that—unlike most Pokémon, who can only say their own name—can communicate with Tim, and is convinced that the elder Goodman’s death was staged.

Together, Tim and Pikachu start to unravel a conspiracy implicating the Murdoch-esque media empire at the heart of the city, which is headed by the Pokémon lover Howard Clifford (Bill Nighy) and his weaselly son Roger (Chris Geere). Ryme City itself is a Flintstones-style conurbation where humans and Pokémon live side by side, meaning that bizarre-looking CGI creations can be seen taking drink orders or ripping subway tickets. I realize that all this sounds like the addled ravings of a Nintendo advertising executive, but Letterman and his co-screenwriters Dan Hernandez, Benji Samit, and Derek Connolly do their damnedest to make the world seem tangible. Yes, Ryme City is crowded with flame-tailed Charmanders and marshmallow-textured singing Jigglypuffs, but it feels more like an entrancing alien planet than an exaggerated, hollow branding exercise.

Incredibly for a movie of this scale, Detective Pikachu is shot on 35-millimeter film (a departure from the digital norms of contemporary Hollywood), and the cinematographer John Mathieson lights it rather distinctively, bathing scenes in neon light and hazy filters. The pocket monsters themselves look remarkably tactile and distinctive, escaping the CGI flatness that’s typical of these kinds of creature features. Atop it all is the great detective himself, a bullish but sensitive motormouth played with Reynolds’s usual swagger but animated as a 16-inch-tall furry yellow animal of inordinate cuteness. The performance was created through motion capture of Reynolds’s face, and it shows in every furrowed brow and plaintive pout.

I have a definite fondness for the weird Nintendo characters that are being brought to life here; if you’re a disinterested neophyte, you might not get much of a thrill from seeing a place like Ryme City on-screen. Still, Detective Pikachu does have a perfectly robust plot to offer, and a nice grasp on its overall kid-friendly tone. The jokes are never too arch or edgy, nor do they rely on the cheap, tiresome physical gags that plague so many PG-rated animations. The film tries to approach its central mystery as sincerely as possible: There’s a case to be solved, and a nice young man is on it, with a grizzled, hat-wearing electric mouse in tow. No doubt most Hollywood executives are as baffled as I am that Detective Pikachu made it to the big screen. But even more baffling, and heartening, is how well it all works.



Disney’s 1992 classic Aladdin is one of the greatest cinematic arguments for the storytelling potential of animation, which is perfectly expressed through the character of Genie. As voiced by Robin Williams and rendered in two dimensions, he’s a slapstick genius who can conjure anything, appear in any shape or size, and gleefully defy the laws of physics. For years, animation was the only way such a fantastic character could exist on-screen, but in 2019, visual effects have advanced enough that audiences can see a gigantic blue version of Will Smith try to give the same performance. Technological progress has clearly gone too far.

Guy Ritchie’s live-action remake of Aladdin, the latest in a long line of Disney revivals of its own greatest works, exists in the same nostalgic sphere as recent hits such as Beauty and the Beast and The Jungle Book. It’s a garish, special-effects-laden extravaganza that still manages to feel tossed-off and half-hearted. The film is entirely devoted to the property it’s adapting, but its mimicry underlines just how pale an imitation it is. The only participant really trying to energize the project is Smith, who—poor man—has to spend much of his screen time transformed into a rubbery CGI monstrosity who’s impossible to take seriously.

The best Disney live-action remakes have distinguished themselves by departing from their source material, as Tim Burton’s Dumbo and David Lowery’s Pete’s Dragon did. The hiring of Ritchie, who has directed British gangster thrillers such as Snatch and old-timey epics such as Sherlock Holmes and King Arthur: Legend of the Sword, suggested at least the potential for a more bare-knuckle take on Aladdin’s streetwise scoundrel hero. But Ritchie doesn’t have much more to offer than some occasional slow-motion shots. Aside from a few extra-athletic swings through the streets of the fictional sultanate of Agrabah, this new Aladdin (played by Mena Massoud) is a bland facsimile of his two-dimensional forebear, a charming thief who dreams of a better life after he falls for the beautiful Princess Jasmine (Naomi Scott).

The most substantial difference from the animated original is the effort made to beef up Jasmine’s role. She sings a couple of truly rancid new songs written by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul (The Greatest Showman) to emphasize her loneliness at the palace and her ambition to lead the country herself one day. But given that the rest of the movie is so devoted to replicating the story beats, musical numbers, and visual cues of the 1992 film, these incongruous additions just stick out sorely.

The biggest draw, then, is Smith—a razzle-dazzle superstar who’s been on the downswing of late—playing an all-powerful phantasm who lives in a magic lamp that Aladdin retrieves from a cave of wonders. Genie is a plum role, but whatever motion-capture tech has been used to render him … something is not quite right about it. Mapping an actor’s expressions onto a different CGI face (think Mark Ruffalo as the Hulk) is one thing, but the computerized Genie is supposed to look like Smith, and so I could think only about the little, eerie ways in which he doesn’t.

Smith tries his hardest to inject some vigor into a lethargic ensemble. The rest of the cast gets lost amid the opulent set design and hyperactive editing. Marwan Kenzari plays the villain Jafar as a soft-spoken social climber, perhaps in an attempt to correct for the stereotypes embodied in the cartoon’s seething, drawling egotist; unfortunately, he basically vanishes into the background as a result. The Sultan, a comical ball of energy in the animated film, is a quiet, grim ruler in Navid Negahban’s portrayal. These characters’ lines and plot motivations remain the same, but the dynamism they had in Ron Clements and John Musker’s hand-drawn version is missing.

The film retains all of the original’s songs, which were written by Alan Menken with lyrics by Tim Rice and Howard Ashman. But Ritchie appears to have no idea how to cut them together, and Smith’s singing voice isn’t really up to snuff (he essentially talks his way through a lot of the verses, Rex Harrison–style). Massoud is a tremendous dancer and a fun physical presence, but he sounds auto-tuned anytime he breaks into song; the more capable Scott is burdened by her new musical numbers, which break up the action horribly. On top of all these problems is the unavoidable fact that, even with a colossal budget and the spectacular tech available to Disney, live actors can’t replicate the dizzy kinetics of a cartoon.

There’s one glorious moment in the performance of “Friend Like Me,” Genie’s introduction song, when a giant, disembodied blue hand conjures puppet strings over Aladdin and makes him dance around, performing Bob Fosse–esque acrobatics. But inventive sights like that are few and far between. More often than not, Aladdin defaults to clumsily copying the classic that’s etched in every audience member’s mind. One day, the Disney-remake well will run dry, and that’ll be a good day for live-action and animation fans alike. Until then, ticket buyers’ best hope is that the studio’s future efforts attempt bold changes to their source material rather than pay poor homage.



Hello. I’m a person who has never watched Game of Thrones. You’re a person who has watched every episode. Here is what I have learned about you through the cultural osmosis of seeing random tweets and eavesdropping on writers at The Atlantic.

You are obsessed with a show about dragons and sex. (I mean, fair.) You have memorized a very impressive roster of names with extra vowels in them that make them sound old-timey. You believe the show is either gorgeously shot or impossible to see because it is always nighttime in Westover. You are still traumatized by the Red Wedding, which was basically Kill Bill but in the Middle Ages. You have strong opinions about a person named John Snow, who is played by Peter Dinklage. You have equally strong views about a woman who is BFFs with a bunch of dragons and some other woman who just died. One of them is named Dionysus. (Love triangle with Snow, probably.) Wait—is one of these women an elf?

Actually, I have a few more questions for you. Are there monsters other than dragons on this show? There’s at least some sort of ice king, right? Is Tilda Swinton winning the war? Is she always wearing fur coats and pouring dragon blood into goblets? What ever happened to the child king you all used to talk about? Was he eaten by a dragon? Do the dragons eat the elf-people or just breathe fire on them? When you refer to “zombies” and “pirates,” are you being literal or metaphorical? Is it permanently winter on Game of Thrones? Is that why his name is John Snow? Are there mermaids involved? Is there any time travel? (If not, why not?)

The main thing I know is they all drink Starbucks and either sleep with or murder each other (or both). The dragons are extremely dangerous, and this either excites or upsets you, depending on which house you root for. (Is John Snow a Gryffindor?) By the way, the “game” in Game of Thrones is like the Triwizard Tournament but sexier and way more violent. It seems dragons killed absolutely everyone on the show last week, which leads me to wonder what the final episode will even be about.

Is the main cliff-hanger the question of whether John Snow gets to be the king? Because you clearly have strong feelings about that. You’re also now an expert on nuclear proliferation and on the rise and fall of monarchies, so maybe the finale will be something more allegorical. I know, I know, you totally read the books and think they’re infinitely better. Which is probably why you keep saying you’re so over this ridiculous tale—but you still can’t believe it’s ending.



Updated at 3:21 p.m. ET on April 24, 2019

On an episode of Jeopardy that aired Tuesday evening, James Holzhauer became the fastest-ever contestant on the show to earn $1 million in prize money. During his now 14-game win streak, he has seemed unstoppable, usually pulling away from his competitors early in the game and piling up money at an unprecedented rate: He’s winning more than twice as much per game as the Jeopardy legend Ken Jennings did during a record-setting 2004 run on the show. And Holzhauer’s highest daily prize yet, $131,127, exceeds the previous record holder’s one-day sum by more than $50,000.

What makes Holzhauer so dominant? When I asked him, he was able to sum up his game plan pretty easily: “I sketched out what I believed to be my optimal strategy for Jeopardy: Play fast, build a stack, bet big, and hope for the best,” Holzhauer wrote to me in an email. “In my mind, playing a seemingly risky game actually minimizes my chances of losing.”

It may be risky, but Holzhauer has the trivia chops to make it work. Mark Labbett, a British trivia pro nicknamed the Beast, has been familiar with Holzhauer since competing against him five years ago on a game show called The Chase, in which a resident trivia expert (Labbett) took on layperson contestants (including Holzhauer). The conceit of The Chase is that the expert is expected to outshine his challengers, but Labbett remembers facing Holzhauer as “the worst beating I’ve ever had” on the show.

“I’ve got to give Jeopardy immense credit, and The Chase U.S.A.,” Labbett told me. “In Britain or Australia”—where The Chase still airs—“James would not have made it onto television, because he’s just too damn good. They would never have him on.”

Labbett said that Holzhauer has “the unholy trinity” of Jeopardy skills. First, he has deep trivia knowledge. In training for competitions such as Jeopardy, trivia experts typically memorize lists of presidents, world capitals, and the like—unchanging bodies of knowledge that will pay dividends in competition. Holzhauer seems to have mastered these, but Labbett is impressed by his grasp on more topical categories of information, such as sports, pop music, film, and TV. “He doesn’t appear to have any [subject-area] weaknesses, which is very rare—a genuine all-rounder,” Labbett said.

Developing expertise like this requires a sharp memory, but also a ton of work. Labbett told me that before he became a father, he would spend 30 to 70 hours a week honing his knowledge in some capacity or another. His methods vary: Studying might mean browsing random pages on Wikipedia, watching TV (to stay current), or reading 30 consecutive pages from a reference book.

Holzhauer’s second advantage, as Labbett sees it, is the speed of his recall. “Good quizzers often need a couple of seconds to think of the answer,” Labbett told me. “James doesn’t.” This is a skill that’s not as responsive to practice, and it’s a valuable edge in a game that prizes quickness. So is a proficiency with Jeopardy’s finicky buzzers, which many contestants struggle to time correctly. Holzhauer’s mastery of the buzzer is what allows him to get in ahead of other contestants, even when all three of them might know the correct response.

The third element of the trinity is Holzhauer’s mind for strategy. When in control of the board, he rarely hesitates to pick his next clue—often doing so with an eye for Daily Doubles, tiles that essentially let players wager as much of their money as they’d like—and calibrates his bets without much apparent anguish.

“I know a lot of very good trivia players who would never be able to work out the complex wagers that he does on the Daily Double, because they just wouldn’t be able to think as fast as that,” Labbett said. The ability to make such on-the-fly calculations, Labbett noted, doesn’t necessarily overlap with trivia expertise—trivia usually doesn’t require people to do math on the spot.

What’s helpful to Holzhauer in this regard is his professional background. He is a Las Vegas–based sports gambler, and as such is comfortable not just making risk-benefit calculations, but also putting significant amounts of money on the line. Jennings, during the first 14 episodes of his 74-game, $2.5 million run 15 years ago, placed an average wager of $2,700 on Daily Doubles and $6,175 on Final Jeopardy (the show’s last clue, on which everyone bets). Holzhauer, meanwhile, has averaged $9,879 on Daily Doubles and $26,686 on Final Jeopardy as of Tuesday night. (Episodes of Jeopardy are usually taped months in advance.)

“I would never have had the stomach for those kinds of bets,” Jennings recently told Wired. If he did, maybe he’d have had a chance of winning money at the rate Holzhauer has. Over Jennings’s first 14 games, his overall net gain on Daily Doubles was $48,600. Holzhauer’s has been $319,366.

But even setting aside these successful bets, Holzhauer is outperforming Jennings—and every other contestant, ever—in providing correct responses. Jeopardy devotees tally up something called a “Coryat score” (named for a 1996 contestant named Karl Coryat), which reflects a player’s raw trivia and buzzer abilities, isolated out from the rewards of smart betting. The figure is calculated, more or less, by adding up the value of every correct response a player gives, and subtracting the value of every incorrect response.

According to Andy Saunders, who runs a site called The Jeopardy! Fan, the average Coryat score of a Jeopardy contestant is $11,300. Through 14 games, Jennings’s was $28,786. So far, Holzhauer has him beat by about $1,000—which makes his the highest Coryat score ever. (For the record, the highest conceivable Jeopardy score, wagers included, has been calculated to be $566,400, though this would require a highly unusual arrangement of Daily Doubles, to say nothing of being able to buzz in and give every single correct response.)

With a player this dominant, what could lead to Holzhauer’s undoing? I asked him this as well. “A particular vulnerability is that I can wipe out my entire score with one missed Daily Double, but I could also lose by failing to uncover any of the Daily Doubles at all, or just running into the wrong opponent at the wrong time,” Holzhauer told me.

Some of the game-show experts I interviewed noted the same risks. “The [top players’] knowledge base is vast, and so therefore it’s going to come down to the occasional random fact that they don’t know,” says David Hammett, who has worked as a mathematical consultant for game shows such as The $100,000 Pyramid and The Weakest Link. “And if it happens in particular on Final Jeopardy, against another contestant that has any relatively close degree of savviness with the buzzer and with content, that’s how Ken lost, and that’s probably how James would lose."

A major betting wipeout, then, seems the most probable unraveling of Holzhauer’s strategy. But say such a wipeout never comes, and Holzhauer remains on the show long after beating Jennings’s win streak. Perhaps this wouldn’t be boring: As Hammett noted, many people watch Jeopardy not for the contestants, but so that they can shout responses at their TV and see how they do. Yet suppose that some sort of Holzhauer fatigue sets in eventually, and his presence becomes predictable, and thus bad for ratings. Are there any dials the producers of Jeopardy could turn in order to bounce him from the show?

The game-show experts I talked with stressed that the integrity of Jeopardy is unassailable, and that the existence of cheating or bad-faith manipulation is out of the question. Still, there are ways the producers could think about trying to oust Holzhauer, or at least reduce the amount he wins each episode. (A representative of Jeopardy told me that the show’s producers wouldn’t comment on Holzhauer’s performance while shows he’s on are airing.)

One strategy might be to figure out Holzhauer’s weakest categories, and load up the board—and, ideally, Daily Doubles and the Final Jeopardy clue—with them. But Hammett thinks this would be difficult to pull off. “Those [categories] seem so few and far between. You certainly can’t make an entire game out of those,” he says. “It would probably be (a) impossible and (b) it would just come off looking very awkward.”

What about making the questions harder? Hammett says it’s not unheard of for producers to start adjusting a show’s difficulty if it’s, say, running over budget. But harder clues would likely only play to Holzhauer’s advantage, given that his trivia expertise appears to be deeper and broader than many of his opponents’.

Mark Labbett, the Beast, proposed a twist on this idea. “Do you want to know the best way to stop a superstar quizzer?,” he said. “Make it easier.” A trivia show that asks, for example, about the capital of California or the president who issued the Emancipation Proclamation would erase some crucial advantages of a player like Holzhauer. “It just becomes what we call a cavalry charge,” Labbett said. “Everyone knows the answer—it’s just who hits the button first.” (Though, of course, Holzhauer is usually the first to do so.)

Labbett also discussed the possibility of bringing on another elite contestant, a sort of assassin, to take Holzhauer down. But this would have its problems too. “Then you’ve got a new apex predator. How do you get rid of him?” Labbett said.

Given that these options are not only unlikely to be put into practice but also ineffective, Holzhauer’s streak will probably last until he has a bad day (and someone else has a very good one). When that day comes—if that day comes—Holzhauer will be left with the question of what to do with his newfound fame. Jennings, since his own run on the show, has fashioned a career as an author and a podcaster, and hasn’t restricted himself to the subject of trivia. Holzhauer could go back to gambling on sports in Las Vegas, but Bob Boden, a TV executive who has worked on dozens of game shows, says that Holzhauer might be able to go on to write books, like Jennings, or perhaps pursue a career in television.

In fact, Boden was the producer of The Chase, the show on which Labbett had to contend with Holzhauer. Watching from the control room, “we were dumbfounded by how well he did,” Boden remembers. So dumbfounded, in fact, that he later had Holzhauer audition to join the show as a colleague of the Beast.

Which is to say, Holzhauer will probably have options. But first, he has to lose.



Jeopardy had never seen a contestant like James Holzhauer before. During his 32-game win streak, which ended Monday night, the 34-year-old professional sports gambler piled up nearly $2.5 million in prize money. He also set a new single-day-earnings record—$131,127—that exceeded the previous record holder’s sum by more than $50,000.

Holzhauer made so much money so quickly thanks to an aggressive strategy: He typically played at a fast pace, picked high-value clues before low-value ones, and then fearlessly bet the money he’d accumulated. “Playing a seemingly risky game actually minimizes my chances of losing,” he told me previously. His style of play also, according to multiple headline writers, “broke” Jeopardy, lucratively departing from convention.

While Holzhauer may be off the show for now (he will appear in a tournament on the program’s next season), it’s possible that he’ll alter the way the game is played in the future—that he’ll leave Jeopardy not broken exactly, but changed.

Andy Saunders, who runs the blog The Jeopardy! Fan, anticipates a couple of differences in players’ approaches. “I think you’ll see more people starting at the $1,000 row,” Saunders says, referring to Holzhauer’s favored strategy of picking high-value clues from the bottom of the board instead of working his way down, as is Jeopardy custom. And once they build up some cash reserves and find a tile they can wager on, “I think that people will start to be more aggressive in their Daily Double bets,” Saunders told me. They’ve seen big bets pay off for Holzhauer, he reasoned, and will be less hesitant to put, say, $5,000 or $10,000 on the line.

The result? “Some more exciting games, some more volatile scores,” Saunders said. Players’ numbers might fluctuate more rapidly, enhancing the drama.

Tactics, though, were only one element of Holzhauer’s success, and perhaps the most easily replicated. His trivia prowess and buzzer timing were also crucial. Trivia-wise, Saunders thinks that “people probably could study enough to get to James’s level of knowledge, but that would take a lot of work.” As for the buzzer, “That’s probably going to be the most difficult thing for people to replicate,” Saunders said, calling Holzhauer “a rare talent” in that regard.

When I asked Brad Rutter, who has won the most money overall on Jeopardy, whether future contestants might follow Holzhauer’s example, he made the point that Holzhauer held the advantage of being able to look at money on Jeopardy as a gambler does—primarily as a score, not cash. “Most people don’t have the experience of doing that,” Rutter told me. “The numbers do have dollar signs in front of them, so it’s hard not to think of them as actual money.” He thought this component of Holzhauer’s edge would be tough to emulate.

At any rate, Saunders noted that any changes in play will likely not be discernible until September (at the earliest), when Jeopardy’s next season will start airing. Holzhauer’s final episode was taped in mid-March, which means that his win streak was over before shows featuring him started airing—and which in turn means that any Jeopardy hopeful looking to borrow from his tactics wouldn’t appear on TV anytime soon.

Those tactics helped Holzhauer win prize money at an unprecedented pace. He ultimately fell just short of the regular-season-winnings record set by Ken Jennings in 2004, but—putting the prestige of record-setting aside for a moment—he made about as much money as Jennings did.

It took Jennings 74 wins to make $2.52 million, while Holzhauer made $2.46 million after only 32 victories. If Jeopardy were a job, Holzhauer was more than twice as productive as Jennings.

Which raises a sort of fundamental question: What is the point of being on Jeopardy? Is it to stay on the show for as long as possible, reliably dispatching all challengers night after night, as Jennings did? Or is it to collect as much cash as possible on each show, as Holzhauer did?

Holzhauer himself doesn’t actually think there was a trade-off. “Gamblers have two conflicting goals: maximizing long-term winnings while minimizing the chance of going broke,” he wrote to me in an email. “This limits your bet sizes in sports, but I think the goals actually work symbiotically on Jeopardy, i.e. I actually increase my chances of winning by making seemingly overaggressive bets.”

When I asked Jennings whether the cash or the wins carry more weight, he argued for the primacy of the win streak. “I guess the dollar total matters a few months later when the check from Sony [which produces the show] arrives,” he wrote in an email. “But when you’re standing on that set, believe me, the only thing that matters is whether you win that game or you don’t.”

“It really points out what a one-of-a-kind talent James Holzhauer is that we’re even having this discussion,” Jennings went on. “Before James, everyone just assumed that the cash and the streak were essentially the same record: You would break one by breaking the other.”

Bob Boden, a TV executive and game-show expert (in college, he interned on The Price Is Right), picked fortune over fame. “I’m sure that Ken Jennings is extremely proud of the win streak, as he should be, but money is king and the core value of Jeopardy is rewarding smart people with financial gain,” he told me.

Further, Boden speculated that cash might matter more to Holzhauer personally. “I think the mind of a gambler is to get the biggest payout in the quickest possible time and move on to the next game,” he said. “I’m not sure that he [was] in it for the long haul as much as he [was] to make a big stash of cash and then run away.”

Rutter, the owner of the overall cash record, saw the value in both aims. He noted that Jennings was able to parlay his win streak into a career as an author and podcaster. “But then again,” Rutter said, “cash is cash, and it can be exchanged for goods and services.”

He also didn’t think that the records are necessarily revealing of how the two compare in terms of Jeopardy skill. “I think James has proven he’s on the same tier as Ken,” Rutter said. “Past that, it’s very, very hard to break down who might actually be better.” A metric called a “Coryat score” attempts to capture players’ raw trivia and buzzer skills (Holzhauer’s is higher than Jennings’s) but Rutter said it’s not a perfect yardstick. A head-to-head matchup might be revealing, but it’d need to be repeated many times to be a truly meaningful comparison. “I guess it’s really just a matter of taste,” Rutter concluded.

Whatever the goals of its players, the point of Jeopardy, as a TV show, is clear: Its job is to attract viewers. In this regard, Holzhauer outperformed his competitors, too. About a month into his run, Jeopardy’s same-day viewership exceeded that of every other primetime show, giving the program its best weekly ratings in more than a decade. And more recent figures indicate that Jeopardy’s ratings dropped to their usual levels during its annual Teachers’ Tournament in May, when Holzhauer wasn’t competing. (Jeopardy declined my request to interview a producer.)

But even if more people were tuning in, not everyone was happy about Holzhauer’s seeming invincibility, as his favored strategy disturbed the usual rhythm of the show. One Washington Post opinion writer called him a “menace,” lamenting that he brought to Jeopardy “the same grim, data-driven approach to competition that has spoiled (among other sports) baseball.”

Peter David, a writer of comics and novels, has been watching Jeopardy for 50-plus years—he remembers when the clues in the first round of the show weren’t worth $200, $400, $600, $800, or $1,000, but $10, $20, $30, $40, or $50. He still tunes in every night with his wife, Kathleen.

David told me with a sigh that he’d been following Holzhauer’s run. “I like it when the game is exciting, not when it’s predictable,” he explained in an interview that took place before Monday’s episode was broadcast. “And when you know this guy is going to win, how exciting can that be? I get no joy out of watching him clobber everybody else.”

He said he would have been less inclined to observe the nightly clobbering were it not for Kathleen. “She likes to watch it for the questions, which I can understand,” he said. “So I watch it to make my wife happy.”

“I basically ignore the contestants, for the most part,” Kathleen told me after Peter passed her the phone. “I’m more interested in finding out how much of a royal smart person I am.”

Others, though, were won over by Holzhauer’s record-breaking performances. Sweta Shrestha, a 23-year-old college student in Vancouver, has been fascinated by the show lately. “I try to make it a point to get home [in] time to watch it,” she told me while Holzhauer was still on air. She said she was drawn in by Holzhauer’s strategy—she studies math—as well as, “obviously, huge scores.” To her, even if the outcome of a single episode might have been predictable during Holzhauer’s reign, the longer-term narrative was compelling and impressive.

I asked Holzhauer if he thought he made the show more entertaining, or less. “I would be hella excited to see a contestant like me on the show,” he said. “When I see a player hit a Daily Double in a trailing position, I chant ‘Bet it all! Try to win!’ People who hate change [were] probably waiting for me to go away so they [could] watch again.”

He declined to speculate as to why he was a polarizing presence. “My goal [was] to win at Jeopardy, not to entertain every single viewer,” he added. “If you’re not my wife or the risk manager of a sportsbook, your opinion of me doesn’t really matter.”

Boden, meanwhile, told me that Holzhauer is “a game-show producer’s dream.” The way Boden sees it, some viewers will pull for a player who every night stands a chance of breaking one record or another, while those who root against him will be curious to see if he’ll stumble. Either way, “you still are entertained by Jeopardy, and that is the most desirable outcome a producer could ever wish for,” Boden said. Today the people who make Jeopardy are probably wishing for another Holzhauer.



Ken Jennings rose to fame after an unprecedented run on Jeopardy 15 years ago: Over the course of 74 episodes, he won a total of roughly $2.5 million.

Recently, a contestant named James Holzhauer has been working toward Jennings’s record at an astonishing pace. After the Friday-evening broadcast of the quiz program, Holzhauer had won about $850,000 over just 12 episodes. If he keeps up that rate, he’ll reach $2.5 million in less than half the time it took Jennings to do so.

Before Holzhauer went on the show, the most money earned in a single episode of Jeopardy was $77,000. During his 12-episode streak, he’s beaten that total not once, but five times, and has set a new record of $131,127. Holzhauer’s success has been attributed not just to his deep trivia knowledge, but also to his aggressive style of play—he homes in on high-value tiles that might contain Daily Doubles, and then often bets enormous sums when he finds them—and his unmatched buzzer-pressing reflexes.

Whatever his method, Holzhauer is far exceeding the show’s average single-day winnings, which a Jeopardy fan website calculated to be $19,980. With his sometimes six-figure daily prizes, how much damage is Holzhauer doing to the show’s finances?

“Every game show has a prize budget,” says Bob Boden, a former head of programming at Game Show Network who has worked on dozens of shows there and elsewhere, including Family Feud. “Typically, for a long-running show the prize budget is determined by way of averages of what has been won in the past.” Large deviations from such averages can strain these prize budgets. “James’s performance, I’m sure, is causing grief for an accountant somewhere,” says Boden, who’s now an executive at the production company Entertainment Studios.





Estimating payouts is easier for some types of shows than others. “You know that the winner of Survivor is going to get $1 million, and you know what the second- and third-place players will get, so the prize budget on that is locked,” Boden says. Budgets for shows such as Jeopardy with variable winnings are harder to project.

Some production companies protect against that unpredictability by taking out insurance policies that cover abnormally large jackpots. This is common, Boden says, for shows such as Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, in which giving out the top prize is rare but really costly. But he says he’d be surprised if Jeopardy, which has a prize structure less prone to extremes, has such a policy. (Representatives for Jeopardy and Sony Pictures Television, which produces it, did not respond to requests for details about the show’s financial workings.)

Jeopardy, though, should fare just fine during Holzhauer’s reign, for two reasons. First, prize budgets are generally not game shows’ biggest expenses. Boden says that the bills for paying production crews and on-air talent tend to be higher. (The salary of Alex Trebek, Jeopardy’s host, has been reported to be $10 million a year.)

Second, Holzhauer’s stellar performances are drawing in more viewers. Normally, Boden says, it’s not compelling TV for a single player to run up the score, “but in a situation like this, where records are being set and broken every night, the excitement, I believe, outweighs the lopsided results.”

That excitement will almost definitely help the show’s bottom line. Increased viewership often translates to more lucrative ad sales (though, Boden notes, this uptick in ad value isn’t immediate and would take some time to kick in). Spikes in popularity are also good for whatever additional revenue streams a show may have, such as merchandising or interactive gaming. More symbolically, Boden says, a thrilling contestant like Holzhauer can further burnish the reputation of a long-running game show like Jeopardy, solidifying its place in the canon of American TV.

Jennings was extremely valuable to Jeopardy in this regard, but with average winnings of about $34,000 an episode, he was a bargain compared with Holzhauer, who’s averaging roughly $71,000. In fact, if reports of Trebek’s salary are indeed correct, Holzhauer is currently outearning even the show’s host on a per-episode basis—though, of course, he has a bit less job security.



On Tuesday of last week, Joe Biden gave a speech in New York City at the Biden Courage Awards. During the talk, the former vice president addressed a nearly 30-year-old matter that remains a raw one for many Americans: the way Biden, as the chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1991, had handled the Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas. And the way he had mishandled the testimony, as part of those hearings, of Anita Hill. “A brave lawyer, a really notable woman, Anita Hill, a professor, showed the courage of a lifetime talking about her experience being harassed by Clarence Thomas,” Biden told the crowd, magnanimously. “But she paid a terrible price. She was abused in the hearing. She was taken advantage of. Her reputation was attacked. I wish I could have done something.”

As the statesman and likely 2020 candidate continued with his speech, he moved from the passive voice to the declarative: “There were a bunch of white guys … hearing this testimony in the Senate Judiciary Committee,” Biden reminded the crowd. “So when Anita Hill came to testify, she faced a committee that didn’t fully understand what the hell it was all about. And to this day, I regret I couldn’t come up with a way to get her the kind of hearing she deserved, given the courage she showed by reaching out to us.”

I regret I couldn’t come up with a way to get her the kind of hearing she deserved. The irony of it all was thick: Joe Biden, chair of the Judiciary Committee, was precisely the person who could have prevented the abuse Hill endured. He could have allowed Angela Wright and Sukari Hardnett—both former employees of Thomas’s, both willing to speak to corroborate Hill’s testimony—to appear before the committee after Hill did. She needn’t have done it alone, under immense pressure and, she would later write, the “hot glare of the lights and cameras,” as a panel composed entirely of 14 white men wondered on national television whether she was perhaps simply an erotomaniac with an unrequited crush on her boss. But: Hill did it alone. Biden did not intervene. And Thomas was confirmed to the Court, in large part because the hearing had amounted to his word against hers—rather than his word against hers, and hers, and hers.

The hearing fomented such rage among women that it inspired a record number of them to seek and win elective office; it led then-22-year-old Rebecca Walker, the daughter of the writer Alice Walker, to take to the pages of Ms. magazine and announce the arrival of a new wave—a third wave—of feminism. (“Let this dismissal of a woman’s experience move you to anger,” Walker wrote. “Turn that outrage into political power.”)

Biden, in the years since, has expressed regret for it all; he has provided several other passive-voiced explanations about what went wrong and who did the wronging. But he has never offered Hill, directly, that far more foundational thing: a simple apology. He has admitted that he owes her one; he said, when asked about it in 2017, “What I do feel badly about is the bad taste that got left in the mouth of some of the people around Anita Hill, and maybe even Anita, about whether or not the witnesses should have been called who were called and weren’t called, etc.” When reminded that Hill has said she felt the process had been unfair to her—and when asked whether he had a message for her—Biden replied with this: “The message I’ve delivered before is I am so sorry if she believes that. I am so sorry that she had to go through what she went through.”

The conditional tense. The passive voice. If. She had to go through what she went through. Biden is a political celebrity; he is also, these comments remind us, a lawyer. And his non-apology apologies have lingered, phantom-like, for so long that they’ve become a running joke in the Hill family. When an unexpected visitor rings the doorbell, Hill said in 2018, they’ll quip, “Oh, is that Joe Biden coming to apologize?”

It’s a good thing they aren’t holding their breath. Joe Biden, though he might be fond of giving bear hugs and shoulder rubs, is apparently much less fond of giving apologies. On Wednesday, a week after his latest expression of regret about the Hill-Thomas hearings, Biden posted a video to his Twitter feed, responding to another round of testimonies—offered, at that point, by four women who said that Biden had touched them in ways that made them uncomfortable.





The video—the document is ostensibly meant to quell the Creepy Uncle Joe trope that has long been a part of Biden’s story but that has revived in response to the allegations—features Biden, seated on a couch in a sun-drenched room, explaining, in a stream-of-consciousness style, why he’s behaved the way he has over the years. “I’ve always tried to make a human connection,” Biden says.

That’s my responsibility, I think. I shake hands, I hug people, I grab men and women by the shoulders and say, ‘You can do this.’ And whether they’re women, men, young, old, it’s just the way I’ve always been. It’s the way I try to show them I care about them and I’m listening. And over the years, knowing what I’ve been through—the things that I’ve faced—I’ve found that scores, if not hundreds, of people have come up to me and reached out for solace and comfort: something, anything, that might help them get through the tragedy they’re going through. And so—it’s just who I am.

And yet: “Social norms have begun to change,” Biden allows later in the video. “They’ve shifted, and the boundaries of protecting personal space have been reset, and I get it, I get it. I hear what they’re saying. I understand it. And I’ll be much more mindful―that’s my responsibility. That’s my responsibility, and I’ll meet it.”

There is more in this vein. For more than two minutes, Biden explains and insists and reminds and acknowledges and anthropologizes and promises to evolve with the times. He does not, however, apologize.

Instead, Biden defends himself. He repeatedly reverts to the idea of connection—eliding the fact that the women have come forward specifically to describe the ways his alleged behavior has precluded, rather than encouraged, true connection—and talks, with a note of pride, about his refusal to accept a form of politics that is “cold and antiseptic.” The video echoes, in its tone, the statement Biden issued on Sunday, through a spokesperson—the one in which he promised to listen “if it is suggested” he acted inappropriately,” via a statement that was itself responding to precisely such a suggestion. (It’s sad—so sad—it’s a sad, sad situation / And it’s getting more and more absurd … / That sorry seems to be the hardest word.) Both statements suggest the letter of the law without the spirit, apologia without a true apology: Here is Biden claiming, effectively, just as he has done with Anita Hill, that he wishes things could have gone differently. Here he is—the victim of his own desire for connection, the victim of changing norms—offering apology in a phantom form.

The video is set, seemingly, in Biden’s living room; it is vertically oriented, in the rough manner of an Instagram live-stream; its video and sound quality are notably poor. The whole thing has a distinctly first-take feel. The DIY sensibility could be an attempt to foster the thing Biden claims to want above all: to connect with people through shared authenticity—a live-streamed teeth-cleaning by another means.

The low-fi stylings, however, could also be an attempt to telegraph something else: the notion that the women’s claims aren’t as significant as many in the media have made them out to be—that those claims deserve, indeed, no more vaunted response than an unscripted video shot on an assistant’s smartphone. (Biden himself seems notably listless in the video; perhaps he is merely tired—he has had a long week—or perhaps, as my colleague Robinson Meyer put it, he is engaged in a kind of “weaponized boredom.”) The low production values, which make the video inhospitable for replay on cable and radio, might be a feature rather than a bug—a video embracing the aesthetics of Snapchat because it, too, was meant to live for a moment and then disappear into the ether.

It would be ideal for Biden: an “apology” that does its work, then goes away. A concession that obviates the politically inconvenient “creepy Joe” stories, but in the end concedes very little. Apologies themselves certainly can be weaponized (norms are changing within American politics as well)—it is all too easy, in the current environment, for a sincere apology to be translated as an admission of weakness. The Christine Blasey Ford–Brett Kavanaugh hearings of last year not only echoed the grotesqueries of the Hill-Thomas testimonies; the fist-pounding indignations of the man who denied it all and rode it out and was rewarded with a seat on the Supreme Court also exposed the norms that have refused to change.

But it is a hollow thing, to talk about being better without fully acknowledging why the need for improvement arose in the first place. It is absurd to talk about the need for listening when one is, it would seem, not yet fully ready to hear. And it is insulting to suggest that a new day has dawned when the old ones have not yet been fully accounted for. Early on Thursday morning, three more women shared stories, in The Washington Post, detailing how uncomfortable Biden had made them during their brief interactions with him. All three objected to the video, telling the Post that Biden’s message, as the paper summarized their comments, “didn’t fully address their concerns.” One of the women, Ally Coll, emphasized the problem of the phantom apology: The video reflected, she said, “a continued lack of understanding about why these stories are being told and their relevance in the #MeToo era.”



No-No Boy is a daring book and, I would say, a test of and testament to character. There is no other novel like it about Japanese Americans in the postwar period. In the book, which is being released in a new edition this month, John Okada wrote of the reentry into civil society of young second-generation, or nisei, men who had served in the U.S. military during World War II. More particularly, through the character of Ichiro Yamada, he wrote of draft resisters who spent the war in prison. In so doing, he probed the intense center of the Japanese American community’s internal conflicts—confusions of loyalty and rights of citizenship, racial self-hatred and shame, the immigrant’s agony of failure and loss of a future, proscriptions of silence and resistance.

Okada was courageous in writing No-No Boy at a time when stigma and hostilities within the community were still raw on the surface. When the novel was first published, in 1957, the Japanese American community turned away from it because what the novel had to say hurt. But in 1971, a few weeks after Okada’s death, four young writers—Jeffery Paul Chan, Frank Chin, Lawson Fusao Inada, and Shawn Wong—rummaging around in used bookstores found an old copy of No‑No Boy. This was the literary legacy they had hoped to uncover. They eventually published an anthology of Asian American short fiction, Aiiieeeee! (1974), featuring an excerpt from the novel, and in 1976 republished the entire novel. “Discovering” No-No Boy—the novel, its nisei author, and its subject matter—defined a literary moment of political protest and cultural recuperation.

The novel takes its title from the registration forms, labeled “loyalty questionnaires,” that Japanese Americans in American concentration camps were required to fill out in 1943, to determine their eligibility for military service. Question 27: Are you willing to serve in the armed forces of the United States on combat duty, wherever ordered? Question 28: Will you swear unqualified allegiance to the United States of America and faithfully defend the United States from any or all attack by foreign or domestic forces, and forswear any form of allegiance or obedience to the Japanese emperor, or any other foreign government, power, or organization? Japanese Americans, considering their status as “non-​alien citizens” denied due process or, if born in Japan, “aliens ineligible for citizenship,” hotly debated whether to answer yes or no; those who answered in the negative were branded as “no-no”s. In his novel, Okada re-created the complicated, violently embittered, and painful divisions that openly seethed during the war and postwar periods and, I would argue, continue to haunt our communities.

In the character of Ichiro Yamada, Okada conflated the position of draft resisters with those who renounced American citizenship. Nisei draft resisters argued that, considering the illegality of their imprisonment, they would, as American citizens, comply with the draft if given freedom; denied freedom, they spent the war in prisons. They might have answered “yes-yes” to the loyalty questions, but only on the condition of freedom for themselves and their families. Although there were those with Japanese nationalist sentiments, such as Ichiro’s mother, who responded “no-no,” many others who responded “no-no” may have done so in anger and protest, or in a panic to keep their families together. These “no-no” respondents were removed to Tule Lake, a designated segregation prison, and under the duress of incarceration, they signed declarations to renounce their American citizenship and to face possible deportation to Japan. In No-No Boy, Ichiro is a draft resister, and while he hasn’t renounced his American citizenship (technically his position is “no-yes”), through the nationalist eyes of his mother, he has. In this way, Ichiro embodies the conflict of identity between filial duty and loyalty to nation.

While draft resisters felt strongly that their protest was legally justified, Okada’s representation of their unwelcome homecoming in 1945 was probably true: The community named them all “no-no” despite their complicated reasons for answering the loyalty questions in the ways they did. It was not until 1968 that the last of the more than 5,000 “renunciants” were legally able to restore their American citizenship. Considering the precarious status of these members of the community, I can understand the quiet reception of No-No Boy upon its publication in 1957. Critics have suggested that Okada’s narrative is unreliable, but his third-person narration moves from character to character, within a constellation of the communal, reflecting the psychic interior of a conflicted and divided community, and gifting, through this storytelling, I believe, a communal reconciliation.

No-No Boy is about nisei men: Ichiro; his high-​school-​age brother, Taro; his draft resister buddies, rebellious Freddie and diffident Gary; and nisei veterans such as Eto, Bull, the wounded Kenji, and the absent Ralph. Though there is a single female nisei character, Emi, this is, well, a “guy’s book.” It’s not just that a bunch of guys claimed the “discovery” of the novel or that it’s about men returning from war and incarceration to reclaim their masculinity; its very texture of realist noir, its perceptions and frustrations, read masculine, carving spaces of worth out of secondary citizenship and the misogyny toward a symbolic motherland. The anger in this novel, with its raw encounters of race—aggressively violent or ironically masked—and the intense narrative interiority of a racialized self, makes it, I believe, a close literary kin to Richard Wright’s Native Son. The demeaning designation of boy in the title is significant. While rooted in a particular historical moment, No-No Boy is also a story of young men who make choices in wartime and who, upon returning, whether as conscientious objectors or wounded soldiers, discover that home is not the same home that it was before.

In the aftermath of war, veterans of color returned home to resume another war: the domestic one of race and Jim Crow. No-No Boy captures not only the uneasy homecoming of Japanese Americans—hardened by confinement, harboring hostilities, suspicious of others—but also the many complications within the community and on the margins, among Chinese Americans, African Americans, and whites. Despite the dark representation of the raw antagonism of the times, the novel makes a declaration, I believe, of Okada’s democratic idealism, participating in a longer history of movements for social justice and civil rights.

In June 2018, the Supreme Court finally overturned its decision on Korematsu v. United States that had justified the wartime incarceration of Japanese Americans, while, in the same opinion, upholding the Muslim travel ban, another executive order, issued by President Donald Trump, that called for, in his words, “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States.” Other executive edicts have called for a zero-tolerance policy toward those who enter the United States illegally, justifying the separation of families and the detention of children, even those seeking asylum at our borders. Throughout the nation, there are currently more than 200 immigrant detention centers, detaining, as of 2017, a daily average of 39,000 individuals. No-No Boy is a cautionary tale. Rereading it, reliving the history of the incarceration of immigrant families based on racial prejudice, executive privilege, and the false assertion of military necessity, fills me with deep sadness. The stories of Okada and his contemporaries, including those of my parents and their siblings, are ones of injustice, of pain and loss, and of physical and emotional violence, with consequences that outlive that generation—a cruel history that, we should have learned by now, should never be repeated.

No-No Boy may be read as a test of character, questioning the rigid binary of loyalty—yes or no—and teaching us that what makes us human and complex, what constitutes character, are all the questions and cares that exist between yes and no: ethical and political choices, our best intentions, our social and cultural being, beliefs, courage, fears, failures, and compassion. More than half a century later, Okada’s novel challenges us once again with the question of character, asking us, as individuals and as a society, what we are made of.

This article has been adapted from Karen Tei Yamashita’s introduction to No-No Boy, by John Okada.



When the 22-year-old director John Singleton was reportedly offered $100,000 to back away from directing his 1991 feature film, Boyz n the Hood, the newly minted film-school graduate balked in the Columbia Pictures office. “I said, ‘Well, we have to end this meeting right now because I’m doing this movie,’” Singleton recalled in a 2003 documentary about the film, Friendly Fire: Making an Urban Legend. “This is the movie that I was born to make.”

The director, who died Monday afternoon at the age of 51, stunned studio executives and audiences alike with the nuanced drama about a group of young black men growing up in South Central Los Angeles. The film was released in the months following the videotaped beating of Rodney King, and subsequently served a dual function: For many black viewers, Boyz was one of precious few cinematic representations directed by someone with a personal knowledge of—and investment in—the wrenching material on-screen. For others watching, the film was both emotionally gripping and explanatory without being didactic.

Singleton would go on to earn an Oscar nomination for directing in 1992, becoming the first African American—and the youngest person of any race—to receive the distinction, at only 24. “I always feel like I got nominated because Spike [Lee] was passed over for Do the Right Thing,” the director told The Hollywood Reporter last year during a roundtable conversation among the only four African American directors to have been nominated for the award at that point. (Singleton was also nominated for a screenwriting Oscar in 1992, and the prolific Lee would go on to win the Best Adapted Screenplay award at the 2019 Oscars, for BlacKkKlansman.)

But Singleton’s legacy extends far beyond his own honors. The director would go on to make eight more films following Boyz, and ushered in a renaissance of black cinema in the 1990s. After Boyz came Ernest Dickerson’s Juice, Allen and Albert Hughes’s Menace II Society, F. Gary Gray’s Friday and Set It Off, Singleton’s own Poetic Justice, and a host of other now-classic entries in the canon of African American filmmaking. An ongoing series at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which celebrates the extent to which “the 1990s witnessed a historic number of films made by African American directors who forever altered what we thought of ‘black aesthetics,’” cites Boyz as the “granddaddy of ’90s hood dramas.”
With Boyz n the Hood, a film that incorporated violence without ever seeming to exploit its characters’ suffering, the decidedly un-grandfatherly Singleton didn’t just put black actors on screen. Like the late rapper Nipsey Hussle, the director lent grace and reverence to the triumphs and pain of black life in America—and especially in South Central. “I didn’t know how we grew up was even interesting enough to be a movie,” the actor and N.W.A. rapper Ice Cube, who played Doughboy in the film, told Vanity Fair in 2016. “But the way John captured it, it was like cinematic beauty.”
The actor Laurence Fishburne, who met Singleton before the director had even graduated from the University of Southern California, similarly marveled at Singleton’s ability to telegraph loss and humanity with boundless compassion. One of the film’s most memorable scenes, for example, sees Doughboy’s beloved USC-bound brother, Ricky (played by Morris Chestnut), killed in a drive-by shooting. “The moment where Ricky realizes he’s about to get shot, everything goes into slow motion, the sound drops out, and he starts running,” Fishburne said in the same Vanity Fair interview. “He is so beautiful and so innocent—and he’s the fucking Goody Two-shoes! He’s not supposed to get killed! I wept when I read the script. I think about my own kids. I think about kids everywhere.”

Singleton took his subjects seriously. The 1997 historical drama Rosewood, for example, depicts the events of the 1923 massacre in which a lynch mob from a neighboring town terrorized the black residents of Rosewood, Florida. Singleton incorporates a fictional character who inspires the town’s residents to fight back against the racist violence—a narrative choice that contributed to the director’s reputation as a somewhat militant auteur. (In his final interview, earlier this month, Singleton laughed at this characterization: “I think I’m a pretty charismatic dude … I just don’t like people trying to subvert my vision of what I’m thinking. I’m kind of a goofball, I’m funny, I’m self-effacing and everything, but I’m very serious about telling the narrative that hasn’t been told before.”)

Boyz n the Hood may be his most acclaimed film, but the director’s later work is no less insightful: See 2001’s Baby Boy and 2005’s Hustle & Flow (the latter of which he produced). Following Singleton’s death, actors who worked with him have emphasized a common refrain: The director had an unmatched commitment to rendering the contours of black life, and the loss of his talent—and heart—is tremendous. “You gave me my first big break in #BabyBoy and again in #HustleandFlow you believed in me when Hollywood did not get me at all!!!” the actor Taraji P. Henson wrote in a dedication to Singleton on Instagram. “Throughout my career when I needed advice it was YOU I called and you answered EACH AND EVERY TIME with sound advice. YOU NOTICED MY FUNNY AND COMEDIC TIMING LOOOONG BEFORE HOLLYWOOD CAUGHT ON.”

To call Singleton a pioneer of black cinema—and of film more broadly—feels like a colossal understatement. The director expanded the realm of possibility for black storytelling with a rare force and vigor. He saw black people. That Singleton remains so peerless is a testament to both his talent and the industry-wide blind spots he spent his career confronting.



Editor's Note: This article is one in a series of responses to Elizabeth Winkler’s article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?,” in the June issue of the magazine.

Curiosity is one of the most permanent and certain characteristics of a vigorous intellect.
—Samuel Johnson

If we did not know how Vincent van Gogh learned to paint, we might ask how such remarkably original paintings came into existence. If we did not know that Mozart was exposed to music at an early age, we might ask how such heavenly music came into existence. If Serena Williams had arrived on an international tennis court with little or no evidence of ever having swung a tennis racket, we would definitely be asking how she was capable of her amazing serve. In fact, in all of these examples we do know how these events came to be, and still sometimes we ask: How did they do that?

Questions arise naturally around remarkable events in human history. Did you see that? Did you hear that? Can you believe that? Some people, perhaps the wisest, are happy to say, “It’s a mystery.” Some seek to explain and understand. Inevitably, people who are trying to do the same thing—in these cases, artists, composers, tennis players—study the evidence carefully. Mike Tyson charged across the ring with the force of a raging bull partly because he had studied for hours and hours all the masters of the ring who had come before.

I am an actor of Shakespeare. I also like to create new drama in the theater and on film and television. I fell in love with Shakespeare in an American high school when I was 16, and since that day have considered the Shakespeare plays to be the greatest drama humanity has ever created, the masterpieces in my field. I have been extremely fortunate. At 22, I was acting with the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford-upon-Avon; at 28, I was playing Hamlet and Romeo there. At 35, I was the artistic director of Shakespeare’s Globe Theatre, in London. I have appeared in more than 50 different productions of plays by Shakespeare and his contemporaries. These works, more than any other art that exists, have transformed my life and introduced me to a myriad of people all over the world who love Shakespeare as I do, many of whom ask the same question I do: How were the works of Shakespeare created? Naturally.

That is the natural response when something remarkable happens. It has been vital to my survival as an artist to understand how they were created.

Now, the work of Shakespeare is all the more remarkable than, say, the work of van Gogh or Mozart or Williams, because though you can be born with genius, you cannot be born with book learning or life experience. As Samuel Johnson says, “Nature gives no man knowledge, and when images are collected by study and experience, can only assist in combining or applying them. Shakespeare, however favoured by nature, could only impart what he had learnt.” In Shakespeare’s case, we have no evidence of any education, or of the extensive reading in many languages and the wide experience of life apparent in the works. When I seek answers for this unorthodox situation outside Shakespearean orthodoxy, I am not, as I have been accused, “biting the hand that feeds me.” I am trying to grasp it.

Recently, The Atlantic published an article by Elizabeth Winkler, who has carefully researched another remarkable aspect of the authorship apparent in the works of Shakespeare. The women characters, of all ages and classes, comedic and tragic, are fantastically well written, far surpassing the writing of women by any contemporaries. In fact, I have come to believe Shakespeare’s women far surpass in their variety and humanity the writing of women characters by any other dramatist, including Ibsen, Chekhov, and, indeed, Euripides. What do you think?

So now, for me, however the works of Shakespeare were created, the creator had not only extensive book learning, languages, vocabulary, and life experience, but also the greatest understanding of women any playwright has ever displayed. What would be the next question you might ask? Naturally.

Winkler and The Atlantic have been attacked so virulently for daring to ask whether a woman might have been involved in the creation of the works of Shakespeare that I feel I must enter once again this fray, where I know I too will now be attacked and insulted for asking such a question.

You may not like the way I act Shakespeare—only McDonald’s hopes everyone loves their burgers—but I can with all honesty say that being uncertain about how the works of Shakespeare were created and who was involved has in no way endangered, diminished, or restricted in any fashion my love, my understanding, or my ability to make a living playing Shakespeare. I would argue, on the contrary, that it has opened my consciousness to a much wider awareness of the universal beauty and multicultural, multidimensional appreciation of the work of Shakespeare that exists in so many different people in so many different ways—even in Tolstoy, who hated Shakespeare! How wonderful is that?

The play I wrote at 47, a comedy of identity crises called I Am Shakespeare, concluded with many members of the audience standing up and shouting, “I am Shakespeare!” Yes, you’re right. The music from Spartacus was swelling to a crescendo behind them. I had shown them a clip of the film and compared the authorship question to that famous moment when Kirk Douglas, as Spartacus, is hidden among the slaves, unidentifiable. Lawrence Olivier, as Crassus, demands that they reveal the true Spartacus to him, or he will slaughter them all. As Douglas does the honorable thing and begins to rise and surrender himself, Tony Curtis (playing Antoninus)—and eventually all the other men—rise to shout, “I am Spartacus,” confounding the authorities. I believe whoever wrote Shakespeare’s work hid himself—or herself—purposefully to allow each of us to be a creative author ourself rather than subject to a presiding authority. Either the man from Stratford did it, never writing or receiving or keeping any letters or books, etc., or someone else did it, attributing the works to him.

Anonymity, the search for identity, is at the heart of the work. Our uncertainty about who wrote these plays is a very positive aspect of them. It allows us to identify deeply with them.

Since 1989, when my doubt was born, I have been trying to understand the self-righteous anger that occurs whenever anyone questions the identity of the author of the works of Shakespeare. It doesn’t occur everywhere, of course. You can imagine all kinds of things about the identity, and be paid good money to assert them, as long as you stick to the name of William Shakespeare.

All sorts of liberties are allowed within the rules of the academic publishing world. William Shakespeare can be Catholic or Protestant. He can travel here and there or stay home and learn everything from travelers in a pub. He can be gay, or straight, or bisexual; a schoolteacher, a lawyer’s clerk, someone who held horses outside the theater. You can spend the year of 1599 with him in London. As Mark Twain so aptly wrote, “Shall I set down the rest of the great Conjecture which constitute the giant Biography of William Shakespeare? It would strain the Unabridged Dictionary to hold them. He is a brontosaur: nine bones and six hundred barrels of plaster.”

We know so little about his life, especially the decade before the writing appears, that he, William Shakespeare, could have been and done almost anything. But if you ask a question outside this “groupthink” … oh, no, no, no, no, no. That’s as offensive as questioning the truth of the Holocaust, according to a London Times writer, who has associated Winkler and The Atlantic with the company of all sorts of slanderous conspiracy theorists.

I have witnessed this genre of journalism for 20 years—ad hominem attacks delivered in a condescending moan as a defense of what is presented as legitimate Shakespearean scholarship. When will the serious scholars I know and admire step forward and distance themselves from these bullying tactics, this literary thuggery? My respected friends, Stephen Greenblatt, Marjorie Garber, orthodox scholars everywhere—where are you? Why the need to attack and suppress a question you are now asking yourselves anyway: “Who else might have been involved?”

Isn’t this how we learn? By asking questions? By probing with our imagination? These attacks are being made in your name, in the name of orthodox Shakespearean scholarship. If you remain silent, you risk increasing loss of faith not only in Shakespeare as the author, but in academia as a place to question and learn. It’s time you stood up for reasonable doubt and debate about a wonderful, vital mystery. Because if the greatest works of drama weren’t created alone by an apparently ill-educated, litigious small-town genius through some kind of supernatural act of imaginative channelling, but were actually made by a collaborative effort among artists—if that effort  included different women and men working together over a period of years—that has huge cultural significance for the arts, for drama, for all society. To carefully explore this honest question from the past might truly enlighten future relations between men and women—as Shakespeare, whoever he or she was, surely intended the work to do.



Entering last night’s fifth game of the NBA Finals, the Golden State Warriors needed Kevin Durant. They faced elimination, trailing the Toronto Raptors three games to one in the best-of-seven series, and injuries had hampered them along the way. Durant himself had missed more than a month of the playoff run with what was termed a “calf strain,” but the team’s problems went beyond that. The shooting guard Klay Thompson had sat out Game 3 after hurting his hamstring. One center, Kevon Looney, was playing through a cartilage fracture in his chest, and another, DeMarcus Cousins, had torn his quadriceps muscle earlier in the postseason and could hardly jump. When Durant was cleared to play by team personnel yesterday afternoon, after rampant speculation about whether he’d return at all, the stage was set for the most straightforward type of sports heroism.

Things held to script for a while, with Durant netting three three-pointers and a pair of free throws in 12 minutes to stake Golden State to an early five-point lead. He looked cautious but able, the usual knifing patterns of his game replaced by a catch-and-shoot routine at which he is only slightly less effective. But early in the second quarter, trying a more complex dribbling maneuver, he fell to the floor and reached for his right heel. The game then split. On the court, the remaining Warriors gave up the lead before charging back to retake it in the closing minutes, extending their season by another game. Off the court, Durant was helped to the locker room, eventually leaving the arena on crutches and in a walking boot. In the hours that followed, the news was about as bad as it can be for a professional basketball player: He is thought to have torn his Achilles tendon.

Questions about the nature of Durant’s preexisting injury and his potential for further damage arose immediately, buttressed by more fundamental questions of motivation, influence, and pressure. “I don’t believe there’s anybody to blame,” said the Warriors general manager, Bob Myers, late last night, his voice cracking, “but I understand this world, and if you have to, you can blame me.” The minds of many basketball fans backtracked: to videos of Durant, in preceding days, with an ice pack closer to his heel than to his calf; to reports that some Golden State players were frustrated with his ongoing absence; to pundits calling his return the Warriors’ only chance at a championship.

The invitation from Myers is easy to accept. The cleanest explanation is that the Warriors were not as careful as they should have been, or would have been under different circumstances; that their attention to their star player’s health existed in some kind of relation to the direness of their challenge. Complicating matters is the fact that Durant was due to be a free agent at year’s end—he may now opt to stay with the team while rehabbing his injury—which, in the cynic’s view, could have made the Warriors less invested in his long-term health. Myers recognizes that the cynic’s view will likely be the prevailing one. “The people that worked with [Durant] and cleared him are good people,” he said preemptively at the postgame presser. “They’re good people.”

The ramifications of Durant’s injury are extensive. The immediate effect is that, if his recovery spans the usual year-plus required of an Achilles injury, the NBA will be without one of its most exciting figures, with a guard’s handle and an all-time shooting stroke ludicrously packaged into a nearly 7-foot frame. His absence will alter the direction of the league this summer, as organizations lined up to pursue him in free agency will have to decide whether he’s worth the risk; predicted super teams may quickly become the stuff of alternative histories. The most frightening and humane worry is that Durant might never be the same again. A torn Achilles almost invariably leaves players lessened, robbing them of some measure of grace. The prospect is doubly sad when the player in question is one of the sport’s most graceful.

Durant’s injury is not the only aspect of these finals that illustrates the tensions between labor and management in professional sports. Kawhi Leonard, the Raptors’ star forward, was traded to the team last summer from the San Antonio Spurs, with whom he had feuded for the better part of a season over their handling of his own quadriceps injury; his team-leading turn in this year’s playoffs rebuffs those who would claim to understand his ailments better than he does. In the series’ third game, after the Toronto guard Kyle Lowry fell into the first row of seats chasing a loose ball, the Warriors’ part owner Mark Stevens reached over and pushed him. Lowry was rightly upset—less, it seemed, by the force of the shove than by the sense of entitlement that led to it, the implication that sitting courtside equates to some degree of ownership over players’ bodies.

After Game 5, the Warriors held to fallen-comrade sports cliché. “Prayers up to K.D.,” Stephen Curry said in a postgame interview. “He gave us what he could.” Klay Thompson praised Durant’s courage, saying, “For him to put his health on the line, to come back and compete at the highest level, he’s one of the best to ever do it.” Durant posted to Instagram after the game: “I’m hurting deep in the soul right now I can’t lie but seeing my brothers get this win was like taking a shot of tequila, i got new life lol.”

The comments were familiar, but moving; that is part of the power of sports, to make old sentiments annually new. It was surely the hope, in the hours before yesterday’s game, that Durant would join a lineage of hobbled comeback stories, players who gutted it out in a time of need. The question, in the days and weeks to come, will be whether the Warriors’ brass took the story too seriously and bought into it too much—if they forgot about, or disregarded, what happens to the player if it ends the wrong way.



One afternoon last month, the Golden State Warriors’ star forward Kevin Durant spoke to reporters. The two-time defending champions had just blown a 31-point lead to the eighth-seeded Los Angeles Clippers, and the questions concerned strategy and morale. Durant touched on the team’s talent for ball movement and his belief that the difficulties were simply a hiccup. But the prime quote—and something like the thesis for Golden State’s next couple of weeks—was less inclusive. “I’m Kevin Durant,” he said. “You know who I am.” Over the next four games, Durant poured in 38, 33, 45, and 50 points as the Warriors dispatched the Clippers. Against the Houston Rockets in the next round, he averaged 33.2 points per game, 10 more than his nearest teammate.

The stretch seemed clarifying. Durant came to Golden State in the summer of 2016, joining a team stocked with the two-time MVP Stephen Curry and the all-stars Klay Thompson and Draymond Green. The franchise had already won a title, in 2015, and set a record for regular-season wins the following year. Since then, the Warriors’ style of play has been lovely but often frivolous, the stakes-free experimentation of a squad all but assured victory by its roster alone. But against the Clippers and in a neck-and-neck Houston series, with the shooting strokes of Curry and Thompson turning inconsistent, Durant built a case for his necessity. Talking heads labeled him the league’s “best” and “most unguardable” player. The Warriors’ head coach, Steve Kerr, called him “the ultimate weapon.”

The Warriors that open the NBA Finals on Thursday against the Toronto Raptors, though, won’t have Durant, who strained his calf in the second-to-last game of the Houston series on May 8. In what may be a preview of a permanent condition, they’ve hardly been worse for his absence. Curry has regained his MVP form, Green has averaged nearly a triple-double, and Golden State finished off the Rockets in six games before sweeping the Portland Trail Blazers 4–0 in the Western Conference Finals. With the timetable for Durant’s return still unclear, the Warriors remain the favorites to win a third straight title, but the postseason has lately taken on the feel of a referendum: on who drives one of the most dominant teams in NBA history, and on how much one of the league’s best players actually means to it.

“I think they are harder to guard [without Durant],” Seth Curry, Stephen’s brother and a backup guard for Portland, said after the Warriors won Game 1 of the conference-finals series. “They move around faster when he’s not out there. They’re definitely not a better team, but they’re harder to guard.” The comments echoed a sentiment common among basketball fans, that Golden State gains something—strategic or aesthetic, in function or fun—when their nominal best player is missing. The 2015 champion Warriors, it is hard to remember now, could be credibly thought of as an underdog, their jump shot–heavy approach unlike the traditional style of title-winning teams. And they played with an underdog’s panache, all joyful interdependence and long-range daring.

This Durant-less stretch has seen a return of that spirit, and it began, as it did back then, with Curry. In the clinching game against Houston, Curry made up for a scoreless first half with a 33-point second, canning an off-balance three-pointer with a minute and a half left to put the game out of reach. Against Portland, he scored more than 35 points in each of the four games and averaged more than eight rebounds and seven assists. Even more than the totals, the particulars of Curry’s style of play—his constant trotting to this corner or that wing, the way a series of gyroscopic crossovers gives way, in an instant, to the letting go of a jumper—set the Warriors in motion. “Steph has got the defense so extended—35 feet away from the basket, that’s unheard of,” the Hall of Famer Scottie Pippen said after the series—“how do you defend that?”

Without Durant, the secondary stars returned to comfortable roles making use of the space Curry creates. Thompson, who spent the first few weeks of the postseason shooting poorly enough to prompt rumors about his unhappiness with the team, became his old self against Portland, blanketing the Trail Blazers’ best players on defense and knocking in whatever open shots came his way. Green, the team’s emotional bellwether, was a blur: hauling in rebounds, pacing fast breaks, picking out open cutters, propping up discouraged teammates. “He was like a wrecking ball out there,” Kerr said after Game 3, in which Green scored 20 points to go along with 13 rebounds and 12 assists. “He was destroying everything in his path.”

The Warriors themselves don’t sign off on any notions of addition by subtraction. “We desperately need him back,” Thompson said of Durant shortly after the injury. “He’s our best player.” But the conversation surrounding the team is now focused less on whether they will win the Finals than what a win would signify, were Durant to miss some or all of it. As morning shows find easy fodder in weighing how the team’s success affects the player’s reputation, Durant has publicly and grumpily taken notice.

The ongoing appraisal of the Warriors’ hierarchy has ramifications beyond sports-bar debates. Durant will be a free agent at season’s end, and rumors about his leaving Golden State for a team that would be unmistakably his have persisted all year. In April, ESPN reported a near-leaguewide consensus that Durant would head to the New York Knicks come summer, and earlier this month, the NBA insider Adrian Wojnarowski said that “the Warriors are bracing for possibly seismic change within that organization.” The subtext occasionally surfaced during the season. Late in a testy overtime loss to the Clippers back in November, Green bristled at a critique from Durant. “We don’t need you,” Green reportedly fired back in the huddle. “We won without you. Leave.”

This era of Warriors basketball has been characterized by excellence at the expense of intrigue, the straightforward settling of games and seasons in which the team has better players than any other. Even in its current hampered form, the talent gap remains; few analysts have picked the Raptors to win the championship. But this year’s Finals promise elements that the last two—easy victories over the LeBron James–dependent Cleveland Cavaliers—have lacked. For starters, at least at the beginning of the series, there will be the back-in-time pleasure of seeing the pre-Durant Warriors again on the biggest stage, with Curry launching his audacious shots and Green going about his burly do-it-all business against a (slightly) more convincing backdrop of possible failure.

There will also be the strange sensation of seeing the on-court action echo off-court storylines. Since Durant signed with Golden State, fans have argued about whether doing so diminished his standing, whether his presence on the team was gratuitous. That line of thinking, the theory goes, at least partially informs Durant’s impulse to leave town for a team of his own, where he could put questions of leadership and legacy to rest. For the next two weeks, though—if the Warriors delight and win without him, if they struggle bringing him back into the fold, or even if they cruise to a dull victory with him putting up gaudy, not-strictly-necessary stats—those questions will only get louder.



The debut single from Khalid Robinson, 2016’s “Location,” marked a new model in an old love-song category: the kind about telecommunications. He wasn’t hanging on the telephone, and he wasn’t emailing someone’s heart. He was getting specific, app-y, and post-privacy. As he pleaded for a crush to send him coordinates on Google Maps or one of its competitors, a harplike trill sounded, questioning and unpredictably paced, like a notification. His rich drawl had a faint hint of church in it. But this prayer was a murmur from someone sunk into a mattress amid hours of scrolling.

The song initiated a rise that would see him labeled as a voice of his generation, and the 21-year-old’s success can be quantified in fittingly of-the-moment terms. He’s currently the fourth-most-streamed artist this month on Spotify. Apple Music has been advertising his second album, Free Spirit, nonstop over the past few weeks. When it comes to the traditional barometer for reach, the Billboard Hot 100, his biggest hits are collaborations with other recent pop arrivals: Halsey, Benny Blanco, Normani, Logic, and Alessia Cara (the latter two on the sadly timely anti-suicide song “1-800-273-8255”). That a 95-minute film appeared in theaters this week to promote Free Spirit is a sign of the nexus he’s nailed: being backed both by genuinely fervent fans and by the industrial music machine.

All of which means it’s tempting to hear his shockingly inert new album as a referendum on this era in pop. Free Spirit emits from the speakers like sage smoke emits during a yuppy smudging session: for a pleasant effect that is of dubious lasting significance. Over 17 echoey songs, Khalid approaches melodies with a moaning, slurring approach that doesn’t demonstrate any particular emotional state beyond a lack of commitment. His lyrics tell tales of in-betweenness too, with an ambivalence in love and life that blurs into burnout. “I feel like there’s nothing for me here,” he sings. “But still I try.”

That emotional mode might seem au courant given the generally bummed-out mood of radio over the past few years, but what feels more 2019-y about this album is the elevation of vibes above songs. If the idea is to rack up streams at volume, Free Spirit will succeed at rarely inspiring enough of a reaction to warrant the thought of hitting “pause.” These cuts can be slipped into a wide range of playlists without interrupting the flow. They can be licensed for any algorithmically written Netflix teen dramedy that comes along.

Like a lot of Netflix TV, in fact, Khalid’s recent sound owes a debt to the 1980s—or rather, to the way the ’80s has already been reimagined by 2010s pop culture ad nauseam. Gated drums evoke Phil Collins and watery guitar pulls from The Police, including on “Outta My Head,” which features John Mayer, himself a recent revivalist of Reagan-era easy listening. Elsewhere, squelchy synth sounds like those of The Cars show up, but slathered studio effects make them resemble bright coats of paint that have been dulled by a varnish (very chillwave!). The fact that Father John Misty, another reclaimer of soft rock, wrote the final ballad, “Heaven,” is clear in the way that Khalid’s phrasings kind of resemble Randy Newman’s.

The album, of course, has actual contemporary influences, too. “Intro,” made up of waves of multipart vocals and clouds of feedback, alternately recalls the disembodied warbles of Frank Ocean and the liquid melodies of Post Malone. But Ocean has an idiosyncratic sense of surprise and a penchant for sharp, specific emotions. Malone has an undeniable ear for hooks, and his lyrics—while oafish—do pack flavor. To the extent that there is a Khalid personality discernible on this album, it’s in that he really does think about the world in terms of texting. But he can’t even muster Drake’s sly sense of self-mockery when delivering a line like, “I feel like I’m losing you whenever I’m offline.”





It’s not all mush, though. The John Mayer tune has a breakdown worth getting off the couch for. “Talk” involves a pleasingly odd gait from the dance duo Disclosure. The summery “Right Back” delivers a somewhat memorable lyric about fighting with traffic on the way to a hookup. The best cut, for sure, is the lead single, “Better,” whose depressive hummability was crafted with the reliable Norwegian hitmakers Stargate. Late in the track, Khalid’s Eeyore delivery morphs through the magic of what sounds like a talk box, in a bridge that’s both annoying and glorious: a moment that forces the listener to pay attention. “Nothing feels better than this,” goes the chorus, an example of the kind of exaggeration that great pop relies on, and that even a low-key voice of 21st-century disconnection might stand to indulge more.



This article contains spoilers throughout the second season of Killing Eve.

“Don’t forget,” Villanelle (played by Jodie Comer) said to Eve Polastri (Sandra Oh) during the second season of Killing Eve, “the only thing that makes you interesting is me.” For 16 episodes now, the psychopathic assassin and the MI6 agent with boundary issues have circled each other with animal interest and growing urgency, their mutual obsession intensifying after Eve stabbed Villanelle in the stomach in the latter’s Paris walk-up. But something, over the course of Season 2, changed. When viewers first met Eve, she was compelling all on her own—a paper-pushing bureaucrat who unexpectedly proved she had the raw instincts to catch murderers; a happily married, childless woman with friends and interests and a sense of humor. Oh’s spiky charisma made Eve a good foil even for Comer’s ravishingly unstable Villanelle. They were fascinated by each other, and plausibly so.

The danger with any cat-and-mouse story is that once the characters get within striking distance of each other, the chase is over and the game is done. Killing Eve, which was created by Fleabag’s Phoebe Waller-Bridge, took a strikingly audacious turn at the end of Season 1 when it made the sexual tension between Eve and Villanelle explicit rather than implied. Had Eve maintained even slightly more detachment, she could have kept on playing the Will Graham to Villanelle’s Hannibal Lecter over the course of several seasons. Instead, Eve stabbed Villanelle, Villanelle escaped, and the writers of Season 2 were left with a conundrum: What now? To kill off either of the two characters seems unthinkable. To pretend they can engage in a functional relationship is ludicrous. But to repeat the exact same story again is undeniably dreary.

The compromise struck by Killing Eve’s new showrunner, the actor and writer Emerald Fennell, was to repeat the story but flip the characters. They’ve always existed in opposition to each other anyway, with Villanelle seeming to embody all the wanton, impulsive parts of Eve that she’s learned to suppress over the years. From one of the earliest scenes of Season 2, in which Eve callously snatched a marshmallow out of the grasp of a small child, it was clear that the show was suggesting Villanelle was rubbing off on Eve, making her colder, selfish, and more in thrall to her own desires. Turned on by Villanelle, she sought out emotionless sexual gratification—from her junior co-worker (played by Edward Bluemel), and from her husband, Niko (Owen McDonnell), appalling him and wrecking her marriage in the process. Standing on a tube platform, she even fantasized about pushing a stranger onto the tracks.

Eve’s pivot toward darkness was supposed to add complexity to her character. In reality, though, Oh has never had less to work with. Eve’s escalating psychosexual fixation on Villanelle robbed Oh’s character of all the things that made her interesting—her professional capabilities, her emotional intelligence, her heightened awareness of trouble, even her capacity for joy. In the final episodes of Season 2, Eve seemed either totally flat or hopelessly needy. She stalked Villanelle with calls and voicemails while Villanelle was on assignment for MI6, investigating a ruthless tech baron with a psychopathic streak of his own. Frantic to get back to Villanelle, Eve left a colleague to bleed out alone, even as he begged her not to. And she let herself be easily manipulated—by Villanelle, who conspired to have Eve “rescue” her by murdering a man with an axe, and by her former boss Carolyn (Fiona Shaw), who used Eve’s attachment to Villanelle to organize an off-the-books assassination of her own.

Season 2 drained Eve to the extent that, in the final episode, all she could do was limply follow Villanelle through a series of tunnels beneath Rome, peppering her with questions like a truculent toddler. (“Where are we?” “Where are we going?” “Do you know the way out of here?”) Villanelle, by contrast, became more vibrant, more complex, and—in one of the show’s most off-note decisions—more human. If Eve was absorbing Villanelle, as I wrote in my review of the first two episodes, Villanelle was softening, or at least pretending to. In a group therapy meeting, while in the guise of an addict, she acknowledged her inability to feel things, and the perpetual emptiness and boredom that spur her to kill. But in Amsterdam, just a few episodes earlier, she’d sought solace in pills and broken down in tears after Eve failed to show up—a moment of vulnerability that felt jarringly out of character, just as it belied the idea that she feels nothing.

It may be too much to expect fictional characters to stay totally consistent across multiple seasons of television. But it’s also hard to think of a series that’s elevated its antagonist to such an extent in its sophomore season while sidelining its central character. The show, after all, is called Killing Eve, and yet it’s easier to imagine it functioning now without Eve than without Comer’s mesmerizingly weird and compelling performance of Villanelle. Oh, who’s equally gifted and addictively watchable onscreen, just hasn’t been given the material this season to measure up. (It’s worth noting that the vast majority of GIFs ripped from the show this season feature Comer, an unscientific analysis that nevertheless suggests how little fun Eve has been allowed.) Being unsympathetic is one thing; being dully idiotic because you’re in the throes of sexual mania or possibly embracing psychopathy yourself is another entirely.

In its second season, Killing Eve seemed to get mired in patterns, echoes, and the idea that its two primary characters should converge. (“What is it about her?” Villanelle’s handler, Konstantin, asked Villanelle, of Eve. “We’re the same,” Villanelle replied, to which even Konstantin seemed skeptical.) Eve, rampaging through the bedroom of a love rival and snapping off the ballerina in her jewelry box, directly mimicked the way Villanelle had rifled through Eve’s home in an earlier episode. Both Eve and Villanelle were in some way betrayed by their handlers, who have their own complicated relationship with each other. Villanelle, pursuing the tech baron Aaron Peel (Henry Lloyd-Hughes) for MI6, found herself in the position she put Eve in during Season 1, with a closetful of fiendishly expensive new clothes selected expressly for her. And, in the final scene of Sunday’s episode, Villanelle shot Eve and left her for dead in Rome after Eve rejected her, a mirror image of how Season 1 concluded.
With the story coming full circle, Killing Eve’s next showrunner, Fear the Walking Dead’s Suzanne Heathcote, can start afresh. There are plenty of threads left to unravel, such as Niko’s horror after Villanelle asphyxiated his colleague, and Konstantin’s hint that Villanelle still has family members who are alive. It is, according to Fennell, possible that Eve might be dead, although it seems highly unlikely that the series actually has the nerve to let a Golden Globe–winning actor go out this way. If nothing else, it would be a colossal shame—given all the talent Oh brings to Eve, and all the narrative potential embedded in her portrayal of the character—if this were the last we saw of her.



Early in the first episode of Killing Eve’s second season, Eve (played by Sandra Oh), pallid and shaky after committing an unplanned act of violence, walks unthinkingly into a train station. She goes into a candy store, where she piles scoop after scoop of jelly beans and gumballs into a pink-and-white-striped paper bag. The saleswoman raises an eyebrow at Eve’s wanton gluttony—the bag is full and yet she keeps adding more, until a pale-blue marshmallow tumbles out and lands in front of a small boy. As he reaches out to take it, Eve pounces, slamming her hand down upon his as her face transforms, just for a second, into a snarl.

The moment evokes the first-ever scene in Killing Eve, when the feline, malevolent assassin Villanelle (Jodie Comer) tipped ice cream onto a little girl in a Vienna gelateria. The subtext is striking: The show is insinuating that Eve, whether she wants to or not, is getting closer to her antagonist, the woman whom she hunted for several episodes, the woman who stabbed her mentor to death—and the woman whom Eve in turn knifed in the stomach at the end of Season 1. Eve isn’t just pursuing Villanelle, the show suggests; she’s also absorbing her.

The secret of Killing Eve is that its macabre sense of humor and spy-story subversions are ornamental compared with the series’ grist: the strange, transformative pull the two main characters have on each other. Their unmistakably female dynamic vastly outbounds the “We’re not so different, you and I” synergy of other cat-and-mouse criminology dramas. Before Eve stabbed Villanelle, she first demolished the assassin’s Paris walk-up, smashing champagne bottles and ripping clothes into shreds. Then she confessed to Villanelle that she couldn’t stop thinking about her, and lay down next to her on Villanelle’s bed, as the air between them seemed to thicken. Finally, Eve stabbed Villanelle, an act of aggression that was loaded with sexual symbolism and tension. Their relationship, more uncanny than unconventional, is what made Killing Eve one of BBC America’s biggest hits.

The only problem with the show, which heads into Season 2 on Sunday night, is the paradox that Eve and Villanelle now present. Comer’s extravagant charisma as Villanelle, her unsettling charm, is balanced by Oh’s comic awkwardness and perma-panic as Eve. You cannot, at this point, imagine one without the other, and yet a television series can’t just repeat the cycle of its original season over and over. If Eve and Villanelle stalk each other in perpetuity, intermittently meeting to kiss or maim or both, Killing Eve will handcuff its own narrative potential. But to exile either character is equally unthinkable. So what now?

At least from the limited episodes made available for review, Killing Eve has struck a compromise between change and more of the same. Phoebe Waller-Bridge—the twisted, cherubic, filthy genius behind Fleabag who created Killing Eve and spearheaded its first season—has stepped away, but she’s anointed her friend, the actor and writer Emerald Fennell, in her stead. Fennell, who once wrote a short story for children about cannibalism and who’s playing Camilla Parker Bowles in the upcoming third season of The Crown, feels about as fitting an heir to Waller-Bridge’s demented-patrician sensibility as anyone could imagine. From the first two episodes, which Fennell wrote, she choreographs Killing Eve’s pas de deux between light and dark with audacity. (In one scene, Villanelle tells a child who’s been in a car accident that his face “looks like a pizza.” In another, Eve responds to her feelings of trauma by striking up a lengthy conversation with a telemarketer selling double-pane windows.)

The second season is different from the first, though, because Eve is different. She fears that she might be a murderer. She’s become momentarily engulfed by a sexualized encounter with a psychopath, someone who seems to kill more for sport than professional validation. In the first episode, Oh plays Eve as mostly numb, with flashes of exuberance or despair. Villanelle, meanwhile, is the same as she ever was (the series pulls a fiendish trick early on that hints she might be developing a sense of empathy, only to brutally punish you for being taken in). Circumstances, though, have made Villanelle vulnerable. Forced to flee her home and leave behind her armor of couture clothes and elaborate disguises—not to mention her actual weapons—Villanelle also has an incapacitating abdominal wound (“It’s really gooey,” she says with grim pride) and no handler to help her.

The new episodes reverberate with a sense of humor that’s absurd, bleak, and distinctly British. (If a grown man ever offers you a “hotty-botty,” Killing Eve emphasizes, run.) Where title cards once announced the glamorous locations Villanelle frequented (Berlin, Paris, Rome), now they trumpet her arrival in the unlovely English town of Basildon. She spends a good amount of time in the first two episodes wearing boys’ superhero pajamas that are comically small. Fennell finds unspoken ways to enhance our understanding of who Villanelle is: The assassin has no problem throwing herself in front of a car to get medical attention, but she physically recoils in a later scene when the only shoes available to her are a pair of yellowing, plastic hospital Crocs. Danger doesn’t trouble her; ugliness does.

Eve, though, is more of a question mark. It’s unclear at this point how her encounter with Villanelle has changed her, or what her motivations might be going forward. Previously, her relationship with her husband, Niko (Owen McDonnell), was a small additive to the show, but a healthy one; now Eve seems like she could easily descend into the annals of dramatic heroines with dysfunctional personal lives. She’s still exceptionally intuitive, which makes her an excellent criminal profiler, and though the show only gestures at explaining how she’s back in her old job, the investigative scenes allow Oh moments of pure comedy. Staring at a graying, scarred corpse in a morgue, Eve suddenly exclaims that she’s craving a hamburger. “That’s the formaldehyde,” the pathologist says, cheerily. “The smell of the bodies makes you crave meat.” Killing Eve, wherever it might go from here, is just as contradictory—however gruesome or morbid it is, you tend to hunger for it, fiercely, just the same.



A scene near the end of the new documentary Knock Down the House finds Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, five days after her surprise win in the 2018 primary, visiting the landmark that would soon become her office. Perched on a ledge in front of the U.S. Capitol, the building sprawling and gleaming in the midsummer sun, the Democratic nominee for New York’s 14th Congressional District talks about an earlier visit to Washington, D.C. “When I was a little girl, my dad wanted to go on a road trip with his buddies,” she says. “I wanted to go so badly. And I begged and I begged and I begged, and he relented. And so it was like four grown men and a 5-year-old girl went on this road trip from New York. And we stopped—we stopped here.”

Her voice catches; a tear trickles down her cheek. She ran for Congress, Knock Down the House has made clear, in part because of her dad’s death. “And it was a really beautiful day,” she continues, “and he leaned down next to me, and he pointed at the Washington Monument, and he pointed at the reflecting pool, and he pointed at everything, and he said”—her voice catches again—“he said, ‘You know, this all belongs to us.’ He said, ‘This is our government. It belongs to us.’” She wipes another tear before it falls off her cheek. “‘So all of this stuff is yours.’”

A woman politician, crying on camera. It’s a striking way to conclude a film about insurgency. Women’s tears, after all, have been implicated in some of misogyny’s fondest lies: that women lack control over their emotions, or, conversely, that women are so thoroughly in control of their emotions that they use them for manipulation. But Knock Down the House, as it follows four women in their races to unseat incumbents in the 2018 midterms, presents tears—of exhaustion, of sorrow, of joy, of supporters and partners and sometimes the candidates themselves—with little fanfare and no apology. The film, its director, Rachel Lears, put it to me, is meant to explore “the nature of power,” and you can read those tears as a crucial element of that exploration. Ocasio-Cortez, taking in the gravity of the responsibility that will soon be before her, tears up because … why wouldn’t she? Given the life-and-death implications of American political power, isn’t that a fitting form of intensity?

Knock Down the House, which screened at the Sundance Film Festival and South by Southwest earlier this year and became available on Netflix on Wednesday, has often been shorthanded as the “AOC doc.” This is understandable, given Ocasio-Cortez’s rise to fame (“Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s Superhero Origin Story Shines in Knock Down the House,” one review puts it). It is not, however, entirely accurate. The film focuses on four of the women who were recruited for runs by the Justice Democrats and Brand New Congress, grassroots organizations trying to bring progressive leadership into the halls of power: In addition to Ocasio-Cortez, there’s Amy Vilela (who ran to represent Nevada’s Fourth District), Cori Bush (who ran to represent Missouri’s First District), and Paula Jean Swearengin (who challenged Joe Manchin for his Senate seat in West Virginia). Ocasio-Cortez is the only candidate who defeated the incumbent—and the documentary’s cameras amply capture the frenetic moment of her win. (“It’s me! It’s me! That’s me on the poster!” she tells a bouncer who tries to stop her at the door as she runs into the event that has just become her victory party.) For the other women, the arcs end more abruptly. Vilela learns that she’s lost her bid, and sobs at the news.

Vilela entered the race because of her daughter Shalynne—who in 2015 had gone to the emergency room exhibiting symptoms of a blood clot and was denied full treatment because she had been unable to present proof of insurance. Shortly after that, she suffered a fatal pulmonary embolism. She was 22.

And so, that election night, Vilela told me, she was crying about much more than a lost campaign. She was crying, as well, for the infinitely bigger loss. She was crying for the parents who might be made to grieve because of the failings of a system that so often seems to prioritize the generation of wealth over the saving of lives. “When I saw that we lost,” Vilela said, “the first thing that came out of my mouth was ‘More people are going to die.’ And I couldn’t save them. Like I couldn’t save Shalynne. I felt that weight.”

That she would weep, then, at that moment—in the film, and in her life—makes perfect sense. And her tears, in turn, manage to convey a sense of all that was at stake in her campaign and in many others in 2018: the moralities of health care; the looming threats of climate change; the reclaiming of an electoral system that was theoretically built for everyone but that has generally served only a small sliver of someones.

“If anything, when you cry, you give away power,” the TV anchor Mika Brzezinski once put it. But Vilela’s tears, in their honesty and unruliness, suggest the opposite dynamic: There is power in open emotion. Knock Down the House offers a counterargument to empty stoicism and the strict-father model: The tears, here, double almost as campaign promises. They suggest the kind of passion and compassion that, the film argues, have been absent from the behavior of many of the (white, male) politicians who have shaped the status quo to their preferences. They suggest that the feminine-coded qualities that have often been treated as liabilities in political life are, in fact, profound assets. “Darn it, I want more of our politicians to care that much,” Vilela told me. “That when they’re not getting policies put in place, that they care. That it’s not just about the money to them, and the power. That it’s really about the people again.”

It’s a quietly radical argument. It wasn’t that long ago, after all, that Edmund Muskie, 1972’s front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, saw his candidacy effectively obliterated by a report in The Washington Post that began, “With tears streaming down his face and his voice choked with emotion, Sen. Edmund S. Muskie (D-ME) stood in the snow outside the Manchester Union Leader this morning and accused its publisher of making vicious attacks on him and his wife, Jane.” Nor was it that long ago when John Boehner’s propensity to cry in public got him widely mocked as the “Weeper of the House.”

There are occasional exceptions—last week, Joe Biden got some approving assessments of an appearance on The View that found him, among other things, tearing up when discussing grief—but in general, politicians are not expected to cry. And that is in large part because politicians are not expected to be women. In 2008, Hillary Clinton got briefly teary at a coffee shop in New Hampshire, just before the presidential primary there; the tears became a national news story, and then they became a mythology, and then, finally, they settled into an accusation: that she had manufactured them, obviously, for purposes of relatability. The whole thing suggested the punishing double bind that was as familiar during Clinton’s 2008 run as it was in 2016’s: Be authentic, but not too authentic. Be emotional, but not too emotional. Be real, but … not really.

Lears, the director, and her collaborators were aware of those tensions. Tears can be fraught things; onscreen tears can be even more so. “We were very careful in the way we presented that,” she told me; they focused particularly on the emotional arc of the story, so that the tears, when depicted, made sense to the viewer. “We wanted to make sure that there was enough context so that you … had empathy and would really understand what was at stake.” One of the film’s guiding principles, she said, came from the editor David Teague—an adaptation of a rule attributed to Emma Thompson. “Only cry once in a film, for maximum impact,” the actor is said to have advised. “Decide where it’s going to be. One weep, maybe two, but you have to be very clear about why you’re doing it.”

And so: The film shows Ocasio-Cortez choking up while talking about her dad. It shows Riley Roberts, her boyfriend, wiping away tears as the two visit the Capitol. It shows Vilela, her daughter’s urn next to her, weeping at her primary loss. “I was like, ‘You want to put what?’” Vilela said of that scene. “Can’t you just, you know, skip that part?” But she quickly changed her mind. By showing her emotions, Vilela said—by putting them at the center of the story—the film also “showed my strength.” It is a small yet sweeping reclamation.

Knock Down the House documents events from 2018, as an unprecedented number of women and people of color were elected to office; it premieres, however, in a 2019 that is still hosting dusty debates about “electability” and “likability,” the euphemisms hinting at the insidious forms backlash will take in 2020. As Americans grapple with the shape of power itself—what it looks like, what it acts like, whom it serves—Knock Down the House offers a broad and bracing vision: Imagine a world shaped by leaders who care so much, it hurts.



The pitch for the newly announced satirical fiction film Rothchild, a comedy set in the world of the ultra-wealthy about a forgotten son trying to inherit the money of his influential family, already sounds like an elaborate piece of trolling. The real-life Rothschild family, a Jewish and European banking dynasty, has for centuries been the subject of anti-Semitic myths and conspiracy theories, fables revolving around their alleged control of world finances. The film that’s up for sale at this year’s Cannes Marché du Film, a movie marketplace where a majority of the industry’s business is done, has dropped the s from the family’s name, but the title is still loaded. Even more bizarrely: Mel Gibson is attached to star.

Gibson’s involvement is hard to interpret as anything but a whole other level of provocation, a ludicrous addition to a project that already sounds potentially offensive. The actor and director’s reputation has recovered in Hollywood despite numerous scandals, including a drunk-driving arrest, a racist phone call to an ex-girlfriend in which he drunkenly admitted hitting her, and a plea of “no contest” to a charge of battery. Despite all that, Gibson was nominated in 2017 for an Oscar for directing Hacksaw Ridge and was recently hired by Warner Bros. to direct a remake of The Wild Bunch. But Gibson’s history of anti-Semitic remarks makes him a particularly baffling choice for a project titled Rothchild. (A representative for Gibson stated that the film has no connection to the real-life Rothschild family.)

When Gibson was pulled over by police for drunk driving in 2006, the officers recorded him saying (among other things) that “Jews are responsible for all the wars in the world.” Years later, The Atlantic’s Jeffrey Goldberg asked him about that particular blowup, which Gibson said was a result of drunkenness. “I was loaded, and some stupid shit can come out of your mouth when you’re loaded,” the actor said in 2011, claiming that his invective was prompted by Israel’s conflict with Lebanon at the time. Gibson’s 2004 film The Passion of the Christ had been criticized for pushing the anti-Semitic notion that Jews were to blame for the death of Jesus. The director’s attempt at a follow-up movie about Judah Maccabee never came to fruition, but its screenwriter alleged that Gibson was publicly hateful of Jews and used several anti-Semitic epithets in their time working together (Gibson denied the allegations, but admitted to having had “a little bit of a temper”).

Despite Gibson’s widely reported past behavior, HanWay Films, a British distributor that mostly works on indie projects, announced on Monday that it had acquired the international rights to Rothchild. Shia LaBeouf—who is Jewish—has been cast as the main character, Becket Rothchild, who conspires to kill the nine entitled scions who are in the way of him inheriting the family fortune. Gibson will play Whitelaw Rothchild, Becket’s sinister grandfather. Jon S. Baird, who last made the sleepy 2018 biopic Stan & Ollie, will direct, and the script is by John Patton Ford.

“The divide between the superrich and the rest of the world is an ever-growing one, and it’s both fun and fascinating to delve into its inner bowels along with our hero trying to scramble to the top and claim his piece,” HanWay’s managing director, Gabrielle Stewart, said to The Hollywood Reporter about the movie. The thrust of the story—a villain kills off his rich relatives to try to secure their wealth—is reminiscent of classic black comedies such as Kind Hearts and Coronets, but that makes the choice of title for Rothchild even more befuddling. If the film is really intended as a broad satire of the 1 percent, then why pick such a specific, charged name?

The Cannes marketplace is where production companies try to raise money for their projects by bundling stars, directors, and scripts together and shopping them around to various distributors. Gibson, like many other performers who were huge in the ’80s and ’90s, remains a massive draw overseas, and has helped secure funding for controversial projects such as Dragged Across Concrete by simply agreeing to appear in them. Many movies announced at the marketplace never actually make it to production, and Rothchild may not weather the backlash that is already building against this initial announcement. But the project’s existence alone is a stark example of how much Gibson’s reputation has recovered in the industry—and how tone-deaf companies are continuing to be about his past actions.



Men in Black: International is indebted to the blockbuster franchise that started in 1997 in many ways. For example, over the course of the film, the main characters often wear black suits and sunglasses, and sometimes they encounter aliens. Beyond that, though, it would be nearly impossible to watch this movie and recall what was so good about the original Men in Black. The basic ingredients are there—odd-couple stars, big special effects, and a decent blend of comedy and action. But this sequel-slash-spinoff comes across as a lifeless piece of content, bearing a brand name and a glossy look but little else to remember it by.

In that regard, it’s a typical addition to the Men in Black universe, which has stretched on for more than 20 years without making much of a case for its continued existence. The first film, starring Will Smith and Tommy Lee Jones and directed by Barry Sonnenfeld, is an unimpeachable classic. But it succeeded because of how understated it was, thriving on the chemistry of its leads and their biting one-liners; the movie barely has an action sequence outside of a shouting match between Smith and a giant cockroach. But the two sequels starring Smith and Jones failed to recapture the magic, and so the concept of nattily dressed alien policemen went dormant until now, revived with an all-new duo: Chris Hemsworth and Tessa Thompson.

Their partnership has been ported over from a different franchise film that was actually fun and charming—Marvel’s Thor: Ragnarok. On the surface, their dynamic here has a similar energy, with Hemsworth playing the effortlessly handsome ne’er-do-well and Thompson playing more of a sarcastic, cool-eyed realist. But that pairing has been grafted onto an airless setting (the London branch of the MiB, a secret agency that polices alien activity on Earth) and a hopelessly convoluted plot, which adds up to 114 minutes of nothing in particular.

Much as in the original Men in Black, the film’s main character, Agent M (Thompson), is a new initiate to the special agency, given her first suit and pair of sunglasses after she figures out its secrets and sneaks her way into the headquarters. Impressed, Agent O (Emma Thompson, the film’s one human holdover from the original trilogy) ships her off to MiB’s London branch, where M is put under the wing of the hotshot Agent H (Hemsworth), who is locally renowned for both his looks and his ability to fight off hostile invaders.

Perhaps befitting the European setting, Hemsworth has more of a James Bond vibe than Men in Black’s prior agents. He takes down a corrupt poker game in one barnstorming action sequence early on, beds an alien femme fatale, and at one point trades in his iconic threads for a lilac shirt and pink trousers. It all goes against the idea that the Men in Black must remain anonymous, serving as irrelevant-looking functionaries who busy themselves in the background, erasing civilians’ memories of anything weird they might encounter. The film is filled with loud and useless laser shoot-outs and car chases that take place in the streets of London, Paris, Marrakesh, and anywhere else the globe-trotting agents wind up.

This approach is worlds away from the original film, which had a distinct New York feel and was led by the grizzled Agent K (Jones), who at one point lectured Agent J (Smith) about discharging his weapon in public. “There’s always an Arquillian Battle Cruiser, or a Corillian Death Ray, or an intergalactic plague that is about to wipe out all life on this miserable little planet, and the only way these people can get on with their happy lives is that they do not know about it!” K grumbled, dismissing the high-stakes, sci-fi plotting supposedly driving the summer blockbuster he was starring in. The Men in Black exist not to soak up the spotlight, but to steer as far away from it as they can.

Men in Black: International is less blasé about the intergalactic drama Agents H and M are up against. Its story is ridiculously complex, involving a proxy alien war being fought by multiple species that include two homicidal, energy-manipulating twins (Laurent and Larry Bourgeois); a pint-sized fella who mimics the role of a chess pawn (voiced by Kumail Nanjiani); and a three-armed weapons dealer with a zebra-striped wig named Riza (Rebecca Ferguson). There’s some intrigue around the possibility of a mole inside MiB London, which is run by the imperious High T (Liam Neeson) and the squirrelly Agent C (Rafe Spall). And there’s something fishy going on with H himself, with multiple characters remarking on how he’s changed in recent years (though Hemsworth seems his usual carefree self on-screen).

That frenetic plotting, combined with workmanlike direction from F. Gary Gray (a once-exciting filmmaker who brings as little to this film as he did to The Fate of the Furious), overwhelms whatever natural spark Hemsworth and Thompson might have had together. Where prior Men in Black entries relied entirely on their leading actors, and not on the narrative surrounding them, Men in Black: International throws as much unnecessary story detail and clanging combat as it can at the audience to distract from how fundamentally boring the whole ordeal is. If only the movie had succeeded.



Sir Lionel Frost, the ostensible hero of Missing Link, is a perfect match for the medium of stop-motion filmmaking. He’s an explorer who travels to eye-popping locations around the world, makes a habit of finding the strangest-looking creatures possible, and does it all with a clipped sort of fastidiousness straight out of his Victorian era. The opening scene of the film sees Frost (voiced by Hugh Jackman) battle the Loch Ness monster with hilarious precision, tackling the gargantuan beast with just a walking stick and a notepad. His attention to detail makes him an ideal fit for a form that brings wiry puppets to life through meticulous craft and technology—in which every turn of a character’s head or tap of his foot takes hours, or even days, to arrange.

Considering the effort that has to go into every shot, Missing Link—the latest feature from the bespoke animation powerhouse Laika (the studio behind hits such as The Boxtrolls and Kubo and the Two Strings)—is impressive to the point of feeling daunting. It’s filled with colorful characters, innovative creature design, and some of the most spectacular sets in Laika’s history. But while the film (directed by Chris Butler, whose last feature was the excellent Laika project ParaNorman) conjures several gorgeous landscapes, Missing Link also stands out as a lovely fable about the limits of Frost’s assiduousness, and the complications caused by his sense of superiority.

After his attempt to get solid photos of the Loch Ness monster goes awry, Frost returns to London at the risk of being branded a fraud. His idols, the stuffy members of an adventurers’ guild who deride him from within their mahogany-bound chambers, challenge him to bring back real proof from his next fantastic mission, so Frost packs his bags for the Pacific Northwest in search of a yeti who has been spotted. As it turns out, that yeti is not only real but also capable of speaking perfect English. Frost quickly identifies him as a “missing link” of sorts between modern Homo sapiens and our primate ancestors and dubs him Mr. Link, though the creature (Zach Galifianakis) prefers the name Susan. Together, they journey to Asia to find a hidden kingdom that the yeti says is populated by more of his kind.

The comic frisson between Frost (a pompous dandy to whom Jackman gives the right amount of outlaw charm) and Susan (an extremely avuncular Galifianakis) is just about enough to power the film for its 95-minute running time. Most of Missing Link is a quest through mysterious lands, which Butler and his production designer, Nelson Lowry, render beautifully. The movie’s action, however, is a little less compelling. Eventually, an old friend of Frost’s with the wonderful name of Adelina Fortnight (Zoe Saldana) joins the group, which adds a little more to the dynamic. Mostly, though, Missing Link coasts on the odd-couple connection between its two protagonists, recalling great buddy road-trip movies like Planes, Trains, and Automobiles.

The best part of Missing Link is its finale, which I won’t spoil—simply put, the ancient kingdom that Frost and Susan seek out isn’t quite what it seems, though it is something to behold. Laika’s output has become a much better option for animation lovers than the sequel-heavy roster at Pixar. This latest offering is renewed evidence of the studio’s consistency in making artful projects with strong messages. The film won me over with the lessons that Butler (who also wrote the script) tries to impart about the limits of Frost’s perspective, and with the way Frost’s bond with Susan becomes the first genuinely respectful relationship in his life. Animated movies usually follow a romantic or fairy-tale arc, but Missing Link communicates far more with a smaller scope. Amid the noisy, epic action of most kid-oriented features, this film’s story is clear and effective: a sweet-hearted narrative of how friendship can broaden one’s horizons.



Forty years ago, the director-choreographer Bob Fosse made All That Jazz, his semiautobiographical meta-statement on the meaning of life, death, dance, love, and the ecstatic, addictive emptiness of show business. The film was a surreal blend of styles and genres—“Meet Me in St. Louis meets Citizen Kane,” as Fosse’s biographer, Sam Wasson, wrote—and it ended with the corpse of Fosse’s alter ego, Joe Gideon, being zipped in a plastic body bag at the apex of a fantastical production number. It won four Academy Awards and the Palme d’Or at the Cannes Film Festival.

So any filmmaker daring enough to dramatize Fosse’s actual life story for the screen could fairly be said to face a daunting challenge, one perhaps akin to creating a biopic of Federico Fellini in the shadow of his film 8 1/2. What to do? For a platinum-pedigreed team of Broadway veterans—led by the writer Steven Levenson (librettist of Dear Evan Hansen) and the director Thomas Kail (of Hamilton)—the answer is a sprawling, eight-episode limited series, Fosse/Verdon, which debuts on FX this month. It tells the tortured tale not just of Fosse, but also of his 30-year artistic and emotional collaboration with his dance partner, third wife, and too-often-unsung muse, Gwen Verdon.

“Absolutely, that was a major anxiety—it was a question before even starting,” Levenson, the series’ showrunner and principal writer, told me. “With All That Jazz in existence, what is the reason to tell this story? Is there a reason to tell this story, or is it impossible?” In the end, Levenson said, after digging into Fosse, Wasson’s authoritative 2013 biography, on which the series is based, he and his collaborators realized that “Bob Fosse presented his story the way he wanted it presented, and he had a very clear editorial angle, and there were certain things he left out, and certain ways he framed his story and choices he made as an artist.”

It turns out that the biggest thing Fosse omitted from his accounting was Verdon herself, who is presented in All That Jazz as “a pretty tertiary character” and “sort of a nag,” according to Levenson, instead of as what she actually was: a crucial partner in Fosse’s work—his “creative cohabitant,” in Wasson’s words. At the same time, with her pitch-true, sandpaper singing voice and gamine air, Verdon was “widely regarded as the best dancer ever to brighten the Broadway stage,” as her New York Times obituary put it. At the 25th annual Tony Awards, in 1971, when Broadway’s living royalty reprised their signature roles, she was the only performer to appear three times.

Fosse/Verdon goes a long way toward redressing this hagio-biographical imbalance. If Roy Scheider’s Joe Gideon in All That Jazz was a priapic, pill-popping egomaniac auteur, Sam Rockwell’s Bobby Fosse in Fosse/Verdon is a wounded, vulnerable artist—scarred by the sexual abuse he suffered as a teenage hoofer at the hands of strippers with whom he shared the bill in his native Chicago—who relies again and again on the emotional support and clear-eyed theatrical judgment of Verdon, as embodied by a luminous Michelle Williams.

The series took shape in 2017, just as the #MeToo movement was exploding, and from the beginning, the creative team (Hamilton’s Lin-Manuel Miranda is an executive producer) knew it would have to grapple with Fosse’s notorious womanizing; the director could be an unyielding—and sometimes vindictive—harasser of his dancers. The show is unflinching on this point. There are scenes of suave seduction, but also a shocking moment (based in fact) in which Fosse first offers unwelcome kisses, then gropes a dancer outside her apartment, after dangling a plum number in Pippin; when he won’t stop, she kicks him in the groin. Later, trying her out for the role, he savages her dancing, then gives the part to someone else.

Still, Levenson and Kail understood that the Fosse-Verdon partnership would have to be the heart of their story only after spending the better part of 24 hours with Fosse and Verdon’s daughter, Nicole, herself a veteran dancer and actor, who became an executive producer on the series.

“At that point, we were still very much thinking we were making a show called Fosse, and we left that meeting certain that the only way to tell this story was to make it a two-hander, because Bob’s story is incomplete without Gwen,” Levenson said. “There’s something about his relationship with Gwen, and that love story—however strange and twisted it was—that really fills out the picture of who he was. It felt that at every point in Bob’s career, if you widen the angle just a bit, you find that she’s there—and that felt really important.”

Wasson told me that he sees the Fosse-Verdon partnership as something like “an Ingmar Bergman rendition of a Noel Coward play, a folie à deux between them, a quatre when you include their careers, a six when you invite their lovers. At every permutation, the emotional geometry is insatiably rich.” In the series, when Fosse’s confidence is shaken during the filming of the movie version of Cabaret in Germany, Verdon is enlisted to calm him and assures the anxious producer, Cy Feuer (played by Paul Reiser), “I just know how to speak Bob. It’s my native tongue.”

Fosse and Verdon met when he was a washed-out contract player in MGM musicals—he was a superb, limber-limbed dancer, but had an elfin quality that couldn’t compete with the star charisma of Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire. However, he had just made his mark as a Broadway choreographer with The Pajama Game (think of those signature bowler hats and white socks in “Steam Heat”), and Verdon was the redheaded toast of New York, having stopped Cole Porter’s Can-Can cold with a fervid Apache dance that produced a seven-minute ovation, forcing her to return to the stage from a quick-change in her dressing room, wearing a towel. Their first collaboration was Damn Yankees in 1955, in which she played Lola, the devil’s alluring assistant, who seduces a sad-sack baseball fan willing to sell his soul to the devil if the Washington Senators can beat the New York Yankees. Fosse, who had cut his teeth in burlesque, devised a striptease for Verdon that again helped her steal the show.

One of the many pleasures of Fosse/Verdon is watching Rockwell—with Fosse’s trademark dangling cigarette, cocked hat, and louche charm—teach Williams this number in a meet-cute pas de deux of wary mutual attraction disguised as skepticism and hostility. In real life, Verdon and Fosse were soon enough lovers. Fosse eventually left his second wife, the brilliant dancer Joan McCracken, and they married in 1960.

As Fosse’s career exploded through Broadway hits with and without Verdon (Redhead, How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying, Sweet Charity, Pippin), and then in films (Cabaret, Lenny), Verdon’s dancer’s body aged, and her star faded. Fed up with Fosse’s serial infidelities, she separated from him in 1971, though they never divorced. On the contrary, over the years, Verdon repeatedly came to Fosse’s aid in the crunch, helping him choreograph the movie version of Sweet Charity (even though she had lost her starring Broadway role to Shirley MacLaine), providing costumes from her own wardrobe for Liza Minnelli in Cabaret, and sitting with Fosse as he edited that film’s dance numbers in the cutting room. (She would also be at his side when he died, at 60, just as a new production of Sweet Charity was opening in Washington, D.C.) In 1975, the couple reunited for the iconic original Broadway production of Chicago, whose preproduction period coincided with Fosse’s frantic editing of Lenny and led to the heart attack and open-heart surgery that is at the center of Joe Gideon’s odyssey in All That Jazz. (The fifth episode of Fosse/Verdon, the last released for media previews, edges up to this chaotic period.)

Nicole Fosse, now 56, was intimately involved with the production of the series—she told me she was present for perhaps 90 percent of the filming, mostly at soundstages in the Bronx over about four months ending in March—and pronounced herself “extremely happy” with the result. She found Rockwell and Williams “incredible to work with, as well as just so insightful and receptive to taking in little tidbits of information and personal stories about my parents, and then utilizing them to create characters that are absolutely plausible and emotionally authentic.”

That said, she also acknowledged that the series has been emotionally challenging—if enlightening—to watch. “There have definitely been times where I’ve realized, I have two parts of my brain working,” she said. “I have my brain that grew up with me as a child that normalizes a lot of behavior, that can watch people drinking and smoking and taking drugs” and having “multiple girlfriends, and in part of my brain, that’s absolutely natural and normal. And then I have a newer part of my brain that I want to say I have trained to look at things more objectively, that can look at those same things and see the dysfunction in them, not to place blame, but to understand where certain role models and behavior have come from. I smoked for 40 years. And for four years now, I haven’t smoked. It was normal to me. I’m a Fosse.”

A case can be made that, as a director, Fosse himself “invented modern film grammar—the flashiness, the quick cutting, the atomization of scenes, the fucking around with time,” as Bruce Handy once put it in Vanity Fair. It’s a testament to the power of that singular style that Fosse/Verdon, while telling its story in roughly chronological order, also employs flashbacks, dreams, and fantasies in a narrative that is nonlinear. For Levenson, though, one of the satisfactions of the series is that its tone is so un-Fosse-esque—it’s tender, not cynical, not dark—the filmmakers can feel they have told their story “in a way that the subject would not have told it himself.”

“The big thing that I’ve taken away from it,” Levenson said of the show, “and from the work that I’ve done in theater, is in our culture, there’s this obsession with the idea of the singular genius, and the auteur, and who created this film or who created this musical. And the truth is, it’s an army of people every time. And Bob Fosse in particular was someone who was desperately in need of collaborators, in part because he was a choreographer and director” and thus never a star himself. “He was also someone who deeply resented the fact that he needed collaborators. It was a struggle for him to admit that he needed collaborators and couldn’t do it all himself. Any story that is truthful about how art is made is about how many people it takes. And when it works, it feels like one singular vision.”



While watching the HBO comedy special My Dad Wrote a Porno recently, I recognized the look on Jamie Morton’s face as he read passages aloud from his father’s self-published erotica series, Belinda Blinked. The furrowed brow, the pursed-lip grimace, the eyes narrowing as the brain wrestles with the appalling imagery it’s processing—that look is the specific countenance of someone who’s encountered a truly horrific sex scene in fiction. I know that look because I bore it for several days last month while reading E. L. James’s The Mister, a 522-page colossus filled with sandwiches, expensive consumer goods, and one privileged English aristocrat’s attempts to deflower his Albanian maid, all from the same writer once compelled to liken a character’s penis to “my very own Christian Grey–flavored popsicle.”



It was, coincidentally enough, James’s own success in the self-publishing world with her Fifty Shades series that inspired Morton’s father, in his 60s, to start writing his own works of erotic fiction in his garden shed, under the pseudonym Rocky Flintstone. But if James’s Anastasia Steele is an insipid dishrag of a character, Flintstone’s Belinda Blumenthal is a late-capitalist siren for the LinkedIn demographic, a woman who, in Morton’s words, “shags her way around the world selling pots and pans.” Belinda Blinked is writing so bad that it transcends mere constructs of quality and becomes its own absurdist feat of virtuosity. The actor Michael Sheen has likened it to Hamlet. Emma Thompson has called Rocky Flintstone a “genius.” Morton’s friend, the broadcaster Alice Levine, describes it as “the best bad book ever written.”



Accidental work of art? Yes. Successful crossover into mainstream culture? Affirmative. Before it was an HBO special, My Dad Wrote a Porno was a podcast hosted by Morton, Levine, and James Cooper with more than 150 million downloads. And yet, Belinda Blinked, for all its inadvertent comedy and experimental grammar, still manages to be a model of absolutely terrible erotica. In the first chapter, Belinda arrives for a job interview at Steeles Pots & Pans, a dynamic homeware company with an unorthodox interview process that involves immediately taking all your clothes off. From there, she experiences a maelstrom of X-rated misadventures, like an Emmanuelle of the cookware-sales industry. She’s perpetually getting entangled with characters with names like Mistress Sweetjuice and Alfonse Stirbacker, all detailed in Flintstone’s florid, curiously specific prose. (In one chapter, he describes a character’s nipples as being “as large as the three-inch rivets which had held the hull of the fateful Titanic together.”)

In Britain, where My Dad Wrote a Porno originated, the art of bad (-ly written) sex is so entrenched that it’s celebrated once a year at the Literary Review’s Bad Sex in Fiction Awards. While neither Belinda Blinked nor E. L. James’s The Mister would qualify for the prize—it rewards only badly written sex scenes in otherwise good novels—they do have plenty in common with works by luminaries in the publishing world: Salman Rushdie, Paul Theroux, Tom Wolfe, John Updike, Morrissey. In fiction, it turns out, bad sex is the great democratizer.



Consider Rocky Flintstone’s particular yen for unnecessary information. In the HBO special, Morton reads from a chapter in which Belinda goes on a kind of corporate retreat, spearheaded by a woman named Natasha Biles, who doubles as “the local female lifeboat member,” and who’s wearing a “comfortable yet sexy black leather trouser suit.” During the orgiastic events that follow, Natasha produces dice for a game, which Flintstone specifies were purchased at “Humphrey’s Dice and Mice Joke Shop … suppliers to royalty.” Later, one character removes his clothes and places them on the edge of a wing-backed chair perched on the carpet of the “recently vacuumed room.” This is reminiscent of a postcoital interlude in Newt Gingrich’s surprisingly racy 1995 speculative novel, 1945: “[John] stretched in turn, reached over for his cigarettes and gold-plated Ronson on the Art Deco nightstand with its Tiffany lamp.”



Extraneous detail, though, can seem sweetly innocent when compared with the propensity in bad literary sex to get food involved. Rocky Flintstone is infamous for describing a woman’s breasts as hanging “freely, like pomegranates.” He’s nevertheless in the shadow of Siddharth Dhanvant Shanghvi, who in the 2004 novel The Last Song of Dusk describes a woman’s “weasel-like loins clutching and unclutching his lovely, long, louche manhood, as though squeezing an orange for its juice.” Nicola Barker, in her 2012 book The Yips, leans fully toward patisserie: “She smells of almonds, like a plump Bakewell pudding; and he is the spoon, the whipped cream, the helpless dollop of warm custard.” E. L. James, of course, joins in. “Oh my,” Anastasia Steele thinks during one coupling in Fifty Shades of Grey. “Sweat and body wash and Christian. It’s a heady cocktail—so much better than a margarita, and now I can speak from experience."



Nor do writers in search of similes for eroticized scenes stop at the refrigerator. During their 26-year history, the Bad Sex in Fiction Awards have become a veritable Richard Scarry compendium of sexual imagery featuring animals, machinery, and even municipal day jobs. The historical novelist Simon Sebag Montefiore concluded a sex scene in 2008’s Sashenka thusly: “When it was over, they had become creatures of the sea, their bodies as sleek and wet and lithe as leaping dolphins.” Paul Theroux, in the 2005 book Blinding Light, likened an orgasm to “a demon eel thrashing in his loins and swimming swiftly ... one whole creature of live slime fighting the stiffness as it rose.” Morrissey’s 2015 debut novel, List of the Lost, features a couple “screaming and shouting as they playfully bit and pulled at each other in a dangerous and clamorous rollercoaster coil of sexually violent rotation.” In Kathy Lette’s 1998 novel, To Love, Honor, and Betray, a character observes that “Sebastian’s erect member was so big I mistook it for some sort of monument in the centre of a town. I almost started directing traffic around it.”



All of which is to say that Belinda Blinked might secretly be an elaborate work of satire riffing on everything eroticized fiction does wrong. For instance, metaphor. (Nicholas Royle, The Matter of the Heart: “He sensed that unmistakable stirring common to all men, that loosening, as he liked to think of it, of the bow ropes on the big white submarine.”) Improbability. (James Buchan, The Gate of Air: “Light billowed out of her, and warmth in damp gusts as if from a garden after a rainstorm.”) Bodily fluids. (Nadeem Aslam, Maps for Lost Lovers: “Areas of their bodies [stuck] together with sweat that was like the weak glue that holds segments of an orange together.”) Animals, vegetables, and minerals. (Rowan Somerville, The Shape of Her: “Like a lepidopterist mounting a tough-skinned insect with a too blunt pin he screwed himself into her.”)



Rocky Flintstone’s understanding of anatomy might be questionable. (In no situation should any person who’s not a practicing gynecologist ever grab another person’s cervix.) He might be mysteriously fascinated with the sexual possibilities of selling pots and pans. But he’s also just one among a pantheon of more esteemed writers who are fascinated by sex and yet comically inept when it comes to translating it onto the page. Some have the consolation of Man Booker Awards. Others battle valiantly in their sheds, alone, armed only with a vivid imagination and boundless enthusiasm for sex, stainless steel, and well-vacuumed carpets.



This article contains spoilers for Native Son.

Selling more than 215,000 copies in the three weeks following its American debut, Richard Wright’s 1940 novel, Native Son, successfully captivated readers nationwide. The story of Bigger Thomas—a hardened, murderous black 20-year-old confronting poverty in Depression-era Chicago—thrust audiences into a complicated conversation about race and racism in America. The book garnered comparisons to John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath and earned Wright the title of America’s “best Negro writer.”

But James Baldwin, Wright’s then-25-year-old protegé, was not so generous in his estimation of Native Son. Although he first praised Wright’s novel, and celebrated the righteous indignation of the work as an “immense liberation and revelation,” his later concern with Bigger’s portrayal led him to excoriate his mentor in the 1949 essay “Everybody’s Protest Novel.” In the critique, which later sprouted into the strategically named essay collection Notes of a Native Son, Baldwin admonishes his literary forefather for what he described as Native Son’s grating, dimensionless depiction of black life in America. For Baldwin, Bigger’s acts of rape and murder perpetuated dangerous stereotypes at a time when black men were lynched for less, and served only to “whet the notorious national taste for the sensational.” He argued that with lines like “[Bigger’s] [murder] seemed natural; he felt that all of his life had been leading to something like this,” Wright had created a character who was too grotesque to be a representative portrayal of black people.

In HBO’s new film adaptation of Native Son, premiering April 6, the director Rashid Johnson and the screenwriter Suzan-Lori Parks reckon with Baldwin’s damning critiques. They translate Wright’s plot to modern-day America through a Baldwinian lens, reducing the novel’s most depraved depictions of black life and capturing Bigger’s humanity. And while the latest adaptation preserves much of Native Son’s original plot, Johnson (in his directorial debut) and Parks (who won a Pulitzer Prize for Topdog/Underdog) still seek to tell their own story.

In both the novel and the 2019 film, Bigger, played by Ashton Sanders (Moonlight), sets out on a dark path soon after being hired as a driver for the liberal philanthropist Mr. Dalton (Bill Camp) and his daughter, Mary (Margaret Qualley). After chauffeuring an inebriated and incapacitated Mary home from a party, Bigger tries to help her into her bed. Mary’s drunken commotion awakens her blind mother (played by Elizabeth Marvel), who calls for Mary as she walks down the hall, sending Bigger into a panic. In trying to avoid being caught in such a compromised state, Bigger holds a pillow over Mary’s head, unintentionally suffocating her to death. Panicked and fearing for his life (who would believe a poor black man killed a rich white woman by accident?), Bigger resolves to burn her corpse in a furnace. And thus he begins his life as a fugitive—catalyzing a series of brutal acts that reinforced the most heinous perceptions of black people.

Baldwin claimed that Bigger’s anger and violence confirmed the “fantastic and fearful image which we have lived with since the first slave fell beneath the lash,” in his essay “Many Thousands Gone” from Notes of a Native Son. In Wright’s rendering, Bigger kisses Mary as she sleeps, unable to control his impulsive attraction to white women—a horrific and historic trope. Two and a half decades before Native Son, the 1915 blockbuster The Birth of a Nation showed Ku Klux Klan members fighting to save white women from black men (played by white men in black face), who threatened the women with barbaric sexual advances. For Baldwin, Wright’s depiction of Bigger etched these ideas deeper into the American psyche.

In the new film, by contrast, Bigger resists Mary’s flirtation, thereby subverting the mythical predisposition of black male sexual assault against white women. Parks steadies the film’s focus on Bigger’s fear—captured by his desperate claims during Mary’s drunken revelry: “You gotta stop. You’re gonna get me fired, alright?” And while Wright’s Bigger revels in Mary’s death, and experienced a “terrified pride in feeling and thinking that some day he would be able to say publicly that he had done it,” Parks’s rendition aims to separate him from such an unnatural deed. Bigger’s act of murder on-screen is just as graphic as the one in the novel: He decapitates Mary’s corpse after a fruitless struggle to fit it into the furnace. And though the updated Bigger shows little remorse for Mary’s death, he also shows no pride. Instead, he seeks to distance himself from the murder and tries to maintain his humanity, saying, “So I won’t make it me. I won’t make it anybody. I gotta find a way to be okay somehow.”

While on the run, Bigger’s violence extends to his girlfriend, Bessie, who, in the original text, he rapes one night before bludgeoning her with a brick. In the novel, the two murders are described as “the most meaningful, exciting, and stirring thing that had ever happened to him.” But when Parks depicts Bigger embattled with Bessie under similar circumstances—standing with his hands wrapped around her neck—he quickly pulls away and collapses, murmuring, “I’m so sorry. I’m so sorry” as Bessie runs away to safety. Unlike Wright’s self-satisfied Bigger, the HBO film’s version is burdened by remorse. He is a human who made a grave mistake. Though Mary’s life was lost by his hand, he doesn’t want to be a murderer.

When asked why she cut the rape scene from her adaptation of Native Son, Parks said, “It would’ve hijacked his character. That’s not who he is.” But when adapting texts, what is the cost of removing core elements of an original story—even those that are deemed problematic? Though he provided a much-needed critique about the dangers of singular black narratives, Baldwin—and, subsequently, Parks—failed to underscore (or investigate) the intention of Wright’s depictions. Despite its challenges, Wright’s story did succeed in shocking America’s system, and pushing a country to reckon with how systemic racism and poverty might have led Bigger to rape and kill. In his review of the book in a 1963 issue of Dissent magazine, the writer Irving Howe noted, “The day Native Son appeared, American culture was changed forever. No matter how much qualifying the book might later need, it made impossible a repetition of the old lies … A blow at the white man, the novel forced him to recognize himself as an oppressor.”

Still, the triumph of Parks’s modern translation is that while she also captures what being black in America might drive one to do, she does not compromise her protagonist’s humanity. Whereas Wright’s illustration of Bigger’s outward-facing rage was deemed sensational and not relatable by many ordinary black Americans (the character was partially based on a 1930s serial killer), Parks focuses Bigger’s anger inward. Rather than his murder of Mary begetting more murder, as it does in Wright’s novel, this film’s Bigger imposes the consequences of his actions on himself—by committing suicide by cop. His death means that he rejected the life of a killer; it is his redemption.

Despite their divergent renditions of Bigger’s demise (Wright’s Bigger is convicted and sentenced to death via electric chair), both Wright and Parks write the antihero’s death as happening at the hands of the state. In doing so, they indict a troubled country mired in discriminatory systems—an oppressive parent who aims to strike fear in her children, only to cast them away, unmoved by the loss of her native sons.



In the summer of 1898, the Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay made a discovery that would eventually give the Moulin Rouge in Paris, the Las Vegas Strip, and New York’s Times Square their perpetual nighttime glow. Using the boiling point of argon as a reference point, Ramsay and his colleague Morris W. Travers isolated three more noble gases and gave them evocative Greek names: neon, krypton, and xenon. In so doing, the scientists bestowed a label of permanent novelty on the most famous of the trio—neon, which translates as “new.” This discovery was the foundation on which the French engineer Georges Claude crafted a new form of illumination over the next decade. He designed glass tubes in which neon gas could be trapped, then electrified, to create a light that glowed reliably for more than 1,000 hours.

In the 2012 book L’être et le Néon, which has been newly translated into English by Michael Wells, the philosopher Luis de Miranda weaves a history of neon lighting as both artifact and metaphor. Being and Neonness, as the book is called in its English edition, isn’t a typical material history. There are no photographs. Even de Miranda’s own example of a neon deli sign spotted in Paris is re-created typographically, with text in all caps and dashes forming the border of the sign, as one might attempt on Twitter. Fans of Miami Beach’s restored Art Deco hotels and California’s bowling alleys might be disappointed by the lack of glossy historical images. Nonetheless, de Miranda makes a convincing case for neon as a symbol of the grand modern ambitions of the 20th century.

De Miranda beautifully evokes the notion of neon lighting as an icon of the 1900s in his introduction: “When we hear the word neon, an image pops into our heads: a combination of light, colors, symbols, and glass. This image is itself a mood. It carries an atmosphere. It speaks … of the essence of cities, of the poetry of nights, of the 20th century.” When neon lights debuted in Europe, they seemed dazzlingly futuristic. But their husky physicality started becoming obsolete by the 1960s, thanks in part to the widespread use of plastic for fluorescent signs. Neon signs exist today, though they’ve been eclipsed by newer technologies such as digital billboards, and they remain charmingly analog: Signs must be made by hand because there’s no cost-effective way to mass-produce them.

In the 1910s, neon started being used for cosmopolitan flash in Paris at precisely the time and place where the first great modernist works were being created. De Miranda’s recounting of the ingenuity emerging from the French capital a century ago is thrilling to contemplate: the cubist art of Pablo Picasso, the radically deconstructed fashions of Coco Chanel, the stream-of-consciousness poetry of Gertrude Stein, and the genre-defying music of Claude Debussy—all of which heralded a new age of culture for Europe and for the world.

Amid this artistic groundswell, Georges Claude premiered his neon lights at the Paris Motor Show in December 1910, captivating visitors with 40-foot-tall tubes affixed to the building’s exterior. The lights shone orange-red because neon, by itself, produces that color. Neon lighting is a catchall term that describes the technology of glass tubing that contains gas or chemicals that glow when electrified. For example, neon fabricators use carbon dioxide to make white, and mercury to make blue. Claude acknowledged at the time that neon didn’t produce the ideal color for a standard light bulb and insisted that it posed no commercial threat to incandescent bulbs.

Of course, the very quality that made neon fixtures a poor choice for interior lighting made them perfect for signs, de Miranda notes. The first of the neon signs was switched on in 1912, advertising a barbershop on Paris’s Boulevard Montmartre, and eventually they were adopted by cinemas and nightclubs. While Claude had a monopoly on neon lighting throughout the 1920s, the leaking of trade secrets and the expiration of a series of patents broke his hold on the rapidly expanding technology.

In the following decades, neon’s nonstop glow and vibrant colors turned ordinary buildings and surfaces into 24/7 billboards for businesses, large and small, that wanted to convey a sense of always being open. The first examples of neon in the United States debuted in Los Angeles, where the Packard Motor Car Company commissioned two large blue-and-orange Packard signs that literally stopped traffic because they distracted motorists. The lighting also featured heavily at the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition in 1933 and at the 1939 World’s Fair in New York. At the latter event, a massive neon sign reading Futurama lit the way to a General Motors exhibition that heralded “The World of Tomorrow.”

De Miranda points out that businesses weren’t alone in embracing neon’s ability to spread messages effectively. By the middle of the century, the lighting was being adopted for more political purposes. “In the 1960s, the Soviets deployed a vast ‘neonization’ of the Eastern bloc capitals to emulate capitalist metropolises,” de Miranda writes. “Because consumer shops were rare in the Polish capital [of Warsaw], they did not hesitate to illuminate the façades of public buildings.” In other words, as opposed to the sole use of the more obvious forms of propaganda via posters or slogans, the mass introduction of neon lighting was a way of getting citizens of Communist cities to see their surroundings with the pizzazz and nighttime glamour of major Western capitals.

Neon, around this time, began to be phased out, thanks to cheaper and less labor-intensive alternatives. In addition, the global economic downturn of the 1970s yielded a landscape in which older, flickering neon signs, which perhaps their owners couldn’t afford to fix or replace, came to look like symbols of decline. Where such signs were once sophisticated and novel, they now seemed dated and even seedy.

De Miranda understands this evolution by zooming out and looking at the 1900s as the “neon century.” The author draws a parallel between the physical form of neon lights, which again are essentially containers for electrified gases, and that of a glass capsule—suggesting they are a kind of message in a bottle from a time before the First World War. “Since then, [neon lights] have witnessed all the transformations that have created the world we live in,” de Miranda writes. “Today, they sometimes seem to maintain a hybrid status, somewhere between junkyards and museums, not unlike European capitals themselves.”

Another mark of neon’s hybridity: Its obsolescence started just as some contemporary artists began using the lights in their sculptures. Bruce Nauman’s 1968 work My Name as Though It Were Written on the Surface of the Moon poked fun at the space race—another symbol of 20th-century technological innovation whose moment has passed. The piece uses blue “neon” letters (mercury, actually) to spell out the name “bruce” in lowercase cursive, with each character repeated several times as if to convey a person speaking slowly in outer space. The British artist Tracey Emin has made sculptures that resemble neon Valentine’s Day candies: They read as garish and sentimental confections with pink, heart-shaped frames that surround blue text fragments. Drawing on the nostalgia-inducing quality of neon, the sculptures’ messages are redolent of old-fashioned movie dialogue, with titles such as “You Loved Me Like a Distant Star” and “The Kiss Was Beautiful.”

Seeing neon lighting tamed in the context of a gallery display fits comfortably with de Miranda’s notion that neon technology is like a time capsule from another age. In museums, works of neon art and design coexist with objects that were ahead of their own time in years past—a poignant fate for a technology that made its name advertising “The World of Tomorrow.” Yet today neon is also experiencing a kind of craft revival. The fact that it can’t be mass-produced has made its fabrication something akin to a cherished artisanal technique. Bars and restaurants hire firms such as Let There Be Neon in Manhattan, or the L.A.-based master neon artist Lisa Schulte, to create custom signs and works of art. Neon’s story even continues to glow from inside museums such as California’s Museum of Neon Art and the Neon Museum in Las Vegas. If it can still be a vital medium for artists and designers working today, “neonness” need not only be trapped in the past. It might also capture the mysterious glow of the near future—just as it did a century ago.



Netflix’s ongoing (and laudable) efforts to revive romantic-comedy films have moved so quickly that the company is now plowing through every subgenre available. There was Set It Up, an endlessly rewatchable workplace meet-cute flick; there was To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before, a pitch-perfect high-school throwback. Now, with Someone Great, the moviemaking debut of Jennifer Kaytin Robinson (who created the TV series Sweet/Vicious), Netflix has its first good breakup film. This energetic misadventure, set over the course of one crazy night in New York, charts the end of a major relationship—as well as the hope, and misery, that follows.

Robinson is a vibrant writer, and Someone Great is a confident first film. It makes clever use of various locations throughout New York to create a story that feels like a supercharged episode of Broad City, filled with farcical mishaps involving sex, drugs, and friendship. The movie is grounded by a star turn from Gina Rodriguez, who sheds her chipper Jane the Virgin persona to portray a more frayed romantic lead. Someone Great is sometimes painfully trendy, thanks to flashbacks that are photographed with the neon haze of an Instagram filter and a perfectly curated soundtrack of the moment. But this aesthetic is fitting for a movie that’s best experienced while lazing on the couch, preferably on the morning after a wild night out.

Rodriguez plays Jenny, a 29-year-old music journalist who gets her big break and lands a job at Rolling Stone that, implausibly, requires her to move to San Francisco (Rolling Stone closed its famed Bay Area offices 12 years ago). That news prompts Nate (Lakeith Stanfield), Jenny’s boyfriend of nine years, to break up with her rather than turn their relationship into a long-distance slog. Distraught, Jenny enlists her best pals, Blair (Brittany Snow) and Erin (DeWanda Wise), to distract her by going out and partying around Manhattan. From then on, Someone Great kicks into high speed, and its plot becomes little more than a series of comedy sketches.

The film sometimes gratingly leans into caricature, then swerves away with a cute plot twist. Blair is a type-A stick-in-the-mud with a dull boyfriend (Alex Moffat)—but then it’s revealed that she also has a more dramatic affair playing out in secret. Erin is a free-spirited party animal—but she’s unwilling to admit to herself that her newest relationship might actually be worth committing to. Robinson’s script spends a solid amount of time digging into these dynamics rather than having Blair and Erin exist as one-dimensional plot devices. This is a rom-com where the male characters are the underdeveloped ones, a refreshing turnaround from the norm.

Nate is given a little more shading through the frequent memories Robinson sprinkles throughout the film, cutting between the beginning of his and Jenny’s relationship (when they were in their early 20s) and now. It’s basically impossible for Stanfield not to be charming, so there’s a good amount of wistfulness in Someone Great’s flashbacks, and the loss of Nate’s chemistry with Jenny feels like something worth mourning. But the film establishes early on that while this breakup is sad, it’s also important to move on from. Someone Great isn’t so much a story about losing one’s boyfriend as it is about growing up and entering the scary territory of your 30s, where time seems more precious and juvenile mistakes are harder to ignore.

Once that emotional truth at the core of Robinson’s script becomes apparent, Someone Great becomes a bit of a drag, jumping from one outlandish premise to another as Jenny and her pals try to get the right drugs, score invites to the right parties, and speak in the buzziest sound bites imaginable. Jenny views her breakup with a ridiculous sort of grandeur, monologuing about how special her bond with Nate was, but it’s an understandable attitude for someone bidding goodbye to her 20s as if life will never be the same again. Robinson could stand to further satirize Jenny’s penchant for apocalyptic pronouncements about her love life, but the writer-director is too busy getting easy laughs from set pieces about “Beyoncé weed” and lobbing guest stars like RuPaul and Jaboukie Young-White at the screen. Someone Great is fizzy, frivolous, and probably easily forgotten, but for a weekend-friendly jolt of entertainment, rom-com fans could do far worse.



As this new age of true crime wears on, powered by podcasts, social media, and endless docuseries, the same concerns about sensationalism and exploitation persist. Does the public’s fascination with grisly murders end up glorifying the perpetrators of these horrific acts? Is the lurid thrill we get from listening to conversations with killers worth giving them the very attention they might crave? These are all questions worth pondering as Netflix debuts a new fiction film about Ted Bundy, titled Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil, and Vile, on its service and in limited theaters today. But they’re not questions the movie itself is interested in asking.

Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil, and Vile, which stars Zac Efron as Bundy, is hitting Netflix mere months after the streaming service debuted a nonfiction miniseries about taped interviews the serial killer did while on death row. Both titles were directed by Joe Berlinger, a veteran of true-crime storytelling who has made landmark documentaries about miscarriages of justice, such as Paradise Lost (1996) and Brother’s Keeper (1992). Yet the Bundy series came off as a glancing failure, and this feature-length drama is just as inelegant. Berlinger’s latest film attempts to reckon with the legacy of a brutal murderer who cynically cultivated his public image to make himself seem more alluring, but the story fails to dig in to the horrifying implications of how Bundy was able to succeed.

As portrayed by Efron, the Bundy of Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil, and Vile is mostly calm, charismatic, and self-assured. The killer is introduced as a conventionally handsome man who lives a relatively ordinary life in the Seattle area with his long-term girlfriend, Liz Kendall (played by Lily Collins). Early in the film, Bundy is arrested in Utah and accused of aggravated assault, the first in a string of charges that would lead to his execution in Florida many years later, in 1989. Collins plays Kendall as passive and initially confused by these goings-on, believing Bundy’s vague denials and supporting him in court. But she quickly fades into the background, and the film becomes more of a courtroom drama focusing on Bundy’s various trials and his two escapes from prison.

The script, by Michael Werwie, is credited as an adaptation of the The Phantom Prince: My Life With Ted Bundy, which was written by the killer’s real-life girlfriend, Elizabeth Kloepfer, under the pseudonym Elizabeth Kendall. (The movie uses the latter name for her character.) Kloepfer dated Bundy for roughly six years, including a good chunk of time after he was first arrested. The memoir narrates her confusing relationship with him, including details of his aggressive, frightening behavior. Though the film initially masquerades as a story told from Kloepfer/Kendall’s perspective, it doesn’t commit to the concept. Instead, Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil, and Vile is primarily curious about Bundy’s pathology. His 1979 murder trial was one of the first to be nationally televised in the United States, and he represented himself for most of the court proceedings, gaining a bizarre cult following as a result. Berlinger, too, seems transfixed by the mythos of Bundy’s public persona, even as the director tries to illustrate the “ordinary man” that people such as Kloepfer thought they knew.

Efron’s performance is, at best, capable; the actor has the bland good looks required for the role but none of the underlying menace. The entire enterprise feels deeply fragmented, with brief guest appearances by actors such as Jim Parsons (as the Florida attorney who prosecuted Bundy) and John Malkovich (as the showboat judge who presided over the trial) failing to provide much of a spark as the plot moves through the basic details of Bundy’s time in jail. For her part, Kendall eventually accepts the truth of her boyfriend’s monstrousness and cuts off contact with him, but the movie is largely disinterested in dramatizing that break, reducing major moments of emotional development (such as Kendall quitting drinking) to brief, wordless montages.

The film plays like an episodic drama with certain episodes removed, namely Bundy’s senseless assaults and murders of young women, which happened both before his arrest and after his prison breakouts. Including this material, important though it might be to a complete understanding of Bundy, would have been genuinely exploitative. But that fact only underscores the problem this project faced from the beginning, and a quandary Berlinger fails to untangle: By focusing on only Bundy’s public face, Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil, and Vile succumbs to the same easy stereotypes that the press did during his trial, marveling at how a well-spoken, decent-looking man could possibly do such heinous things. The film clearly doesn’t intend to sympathize with Bundy, yet in making him the star, it can’t avoid doing so to an extent. It’s hard to know if there will ever be an essential and definitive fiction film about Bundy. But this certainly isn’t it.



The easiest way to describe Netflix’s animated comedy Tuca & Bertie is to say that it’s like BoJack Horseman meets Broad City. The new show, out Friday, was created by Lisa Hanawalt, the cartoonist and BoJack production designer whose colorful and absurd visual style notably features hybrid animal-people. And much like the recently concluded Comedy Central series Broad City, Tuca & Bertie is about two 30-year-old, codependent best friends who get up to various misadventures in work, love, and life.

Because this show came from Hanawalt’s brain, the protagonists aren’t humans, but bird-women—a loud, lovable, messy toucan named Tuca (voiced by Tiffany Haddish) and a sweet, anxious, people-pleasing song thrush named Bertie (Ali Wong). The inseparable duo live in the city of Birdtown, where Bertie works at a magazine publisher called Condé Nest and Tuca does gigs for a freelance service called ChoreGoose. Each episode of the show has at least one brilliantly bizarre scene that has nothing to do with the main plot but that sticks in your brain: At the end of the pilot, for instance, Bertie’s boyfriend, Speckle (Steven Yeun), discovers that his dead grandmother’s ashes have accidentally been baked into a cake that has now come alive with her ghost.

Despite its delightfully random moments, Tuca & Bertie is, in some ways, such a classic coming-of-age sitcom that it can be easy to forget how rare it is in the world of TV: It’s one of very few adult animated shows made by and about women. In an interview, Hanawalt discussed the thrills of making a series about a nuanced female friendship but lamented how male-dominated the industry she works in is. “It does feel like the stars needed to align just perfectly for a woman to even get a chance to get in the door,” Hanawalt told me. “I know a lot of women who pitch; it’s not that women aren’t pitching, and it’s not because they don’t have great ideas.”

For Hanawalt, the stars aligning meant that her acclaimed work on BoJack made Netflix receptive to her pitching a TV project. Originally, she was in talks to make an anthology-style series in which each episode looked like it was drawn by a different artist. But Hanawalt kept coming back to a collection of comics she had drawn about a “single, female toucan” named Tuca; finally, she settled on the idea of adding in Bertie as a counterbalance and making an entire show about their special dynamic.

At the start of Tuca & Bertie, the friends are presented as opposing yet complementary archetypes: Tuca is the gregarious, confident, raunchy, and irresponsible one; Bertie is the introverted, slightly repressed, and accountable one. They’re like sisters who are a little helpless without each other. When Bertie struggles to ask for a promotion at work (“I’m a really important cog in the machine—but sometimes I wonder, What would it be like to be a bigger cog?,” she explains), Tuca teaches her how to advocate for herself. When Tuca gets an STD in the episode “The Sex Bugs,” Bertie helps manage the grotesque catastrophe that erupts from her friend’s careless application of medicated ointment.

As the 10-episode season unfolds, the hard line between the women’s personalities gets smudged and their respective backstories and past traumas get shaded in. With Tuca, Hanawalt told me, viewers might start to see her unflagging confidence as a defense mechanism—a cover for her fears that she’ll never amount to anything. Meanwhile, Hanawalt added, “Bertie on the surface seems to have everything together: She’s got a stable job, a stable relationship, but she’s kind of a mess inside. She doesn’t really know what she wants, and she’s constantly getting mixed signals from herself.” For all the duo’s differences, the season sees both Tuca and Bertie engaged in a never-ending project of self-improvement—a self-conscious, mundane, and often performative process of “adulting.” Many viewers will feel a twinge of recognition watching these characters hope their various forms of low-stakes aspirationalism—trying to keep a tidier home or to speak up in a work meeting—will amount to something life-changing.

In making her first series, Hanawalt took seriously the opportunity to tell an animated story about the lives of adult women. Because of the dearth of comparable projects to look to as a model for Tuca & Bertie, she drew inspiration from children’s shows such as Steven Universe (whose creator, Rebecca Sugar, Hanawalt called a “genius”) and live-action series such as Broad City and Hulu’s Pen15. She also knew she didn’t want Tuca & Bertie to be yet another animated program with a mostly white, mostly male staff; Hanawalt estimated that roughly half of the writers on her show were women and that slightly more than half were people of color.

Though she’d learned a lot on BoJack, Hanawalt thought about ways she wanted to distinguish her series tonally and visually. So she reflected on the things that had sometimes frustrated her creatively about working on BoJack. “As an artist and as someone who has my own personal style, I was always like, ‘Why can’t we have plant people? Why can’t inanimate objects come to life?’” Hanawalt said. Finally, she decided on a sensibility for Tuca: “It’s going to be very cartoony and surreal and loose—and set in a little bit more of an optimistic world than BoJack.” Tuca certainly has its gut-punch moments, but it has a much frothier vibe than BoJack; the inventive use of stylized sequences involving claymation and puppets further sets the series apart. While Hanawalt praised the fascinating women characters on BoJack, she knew her show would go further by having a female friendship as its central focus.

Telling a smart and relatable story about grown-up women meant resisting the urge to make her characters models of good behavior. Hanawalt describes herself as a feminist, but she wanted to make fun of certain elements of mainstream feminism, such as the superficial empowerment rhetoric that Tuca and Bertie sometimes glibly embrace. “I don’t want my characters to do what’s correct morally, which is a weird expectation that viewers sometimes have of fictional characters,” Hanawalt told me. Tuca & Bertie indeed has a few story lines that comment on weightier issues such as sexual harassment without offering straightforward or satisfying resolutions; if this sometimes makes for uncomfortable viewing, it’s also realistic—a way of grounding a show in which the subway is a giant caterpillar and the hottest new pastry is a cruller–bundt cake combo known as a “crunt.”

What remains consistent throughout the season, as Tuca and Bertie each try to reach some next level of adulthood, is the bond between the two. The show makes clear that their relationship isn’t invulnerable, which makes it all the more meaningful when they stick by each other’s side. This weird, frustrating, and affectionate dynamic was apparent in Hanawalt’s original comics, and it is the one that ultimately drives the show.

The “Sex Bugs” episode does a particularly lovely job illustrating how well the two fit together. The day begins with Bertie feeling especially anxious, which Tuca recognizes immediately. “You’re having one of your ‘I can’t go outside because literally everything terrifies me and my body is holding my mind hostage’ days,” Tuca declares before dragging Bertie out of the house for a bit. What follows is an uncannily accurate depiction of extreme anxiety that draws on Hanawalt’s own experiences. Consumed with panic at the grocery store, Bertie starts to sing a musical number called “I’m Losing My Shit”—a song that Hanawalt herself performed for Netflix executives during the pitch meeting for the episode—before being rescued and distracted by Tuca.

The episode comes across as a kind of miniature tribute to the people who’ve helped Hanawalt through similar situations in real life. “I have friends who aren’t as anxious as I am, but something about them makes me want to be a braver, better person,” she told me. “In a way, it’s more relaxing to be around someone who’s bolder and less afraid.” What makes her show a joy to watch is that sometimes the “braver, better person” is Tuca and sometimes it’s Bertie. But sometimes it’s neither—and that’s okay, too.



Updated at 1:27 p.m. ET on April 2, 2019.

Hip-hop is a phenomenon of global scale, building cross-hemispherical legends with the ease of a SoundCloud upload, and it was on those terms that the 33-year-old rapper Nipsey Hussle had risen to power. He’d collaborated with superstars such as Drake and Kendrick Lamar; he co-wrote “FDT (Fuck Donald Trump),” this era’s signature protest song. After a string of mixtape releases beginning in 2005, his 2018 debut album arrived at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 200 and earned a Grammy nomination for Best Rap Album. His sharp bark of a voice and weary-but-proud storytelling were becoming familiar attractions in a complex and borderless culture.

But hip-hop is also still a local art form. Where rappers come from is usually not mere factual trivia but rather something intrinsic to their lyrics, sonic approaches, and social agenda. Nipsey Hussle represented this idea even more than most. He was born in the L.A. neighborhood of Crenshaw, and he stayed in Crenshaw; he rapped about Crenshaw, worked with a Crenshaw sound, and more than anything, tried to improve Crenshaw through both music and extra-musical efforts. His death in a shooting that police suspect to be the result of a personal dispute—outside the clothing store that he founded, a day before he was scheduled for an LAPD anti-street-violence meeting—sadly looks like the kind of South L.A. story he spent his career trying to rewrite.

In his music, Hussle straightforwardly continued the traditions of West Coast rap: N.W.A.’s documenting of gangland realities, Snoop Dogg’s easy confidence, and Dr. Dre’s slow-sauntering, siren-whining sound. His biography fit, too, and he used vivid specifics to explain the mind-space and the culture that form against a backdrop of violence, poverty, and drugs. His 2010 song “Blue Laces” was like a 3-D self-portrait, made up of details internal and external: “I got Slauson on my back, Ed Hardy on my hip / Weight of the world on my shoulders, gold rollie on my wrist / Neighborhood chucks, blue checkerboard tint, Dickies saggin’ off my ass.” There’s a certain glamour to that image, but the song was really a lament about the interrelated stresses of racism and gangs. “They think we on some ‘kill another n****’ shit,” he rapped. “We really on some ‘stay down and diligent’ / The streets is cold, turn innocence to militance.”

By the time of that song’s 2018 sequel, “Blue Laces 2,” Hussle was able to rap about courtside Lakers seats and Ferraris. But he was also able to rap about speaking at city-council meetings and making strategic investments, references rooted in his real-life activism and entrepreneurship. In 2018, as he opened up a co-working and STEM space in Crenshaw, he said that he wanted to counteract the forces that led him to the Rollin 60’s Neighborhood Crips. “I remember feeling … maybe I’m not even supposed to be ambitious,” Hussle told the Los Angeles Times. “That’s a dangerous thing. I would like to prevent as many kids from feeling like that as possible. Because what follows is self-destructive.” Or as he put it in “Blue Laces 2”: “Third generation, South Central gang bangers / That lived long enough to see it changing / Think it’s time we make arrangements / Finally wiggle out they mazes.”

His m.o. was improvement by mixing art and business in clever ways. His 2013 mixtape Crenshaw was available for free online, but its physical release came with a noteworthy plan. Only 1,000 copies would be made, and they’d retail for $100 each. “Whether we [accept] it or not, buying music is a choice, not a requisite,” he said at the time. “When I think of the psychology behind what makes me purchase an artist’s album, it’s always a form of reciprocation. Almost like a token of appreciation after I experience the product.” It was a loyalty program to counter the devaluation caused by the internet, a common business model today in media, but one that he arrived at a few years ahead of its time. (Jay-Z reportedly bought up to 100 copies of Crenshaw.)

As his profile grew, Hussle continued to work on multiple scales at once—specific and local, but also broad-minded and big-tent. “FDT (Fuck Donald Trump),” a bouncy 2016 collaboration with the fellow L.A. rapper YG, attracted attention for the bluntness of its outrage against the man who’s now president. But Hussle’s verses show careful craft and a clear recognition that he’d be speaking to a wide audience. Calls for black, brown, and white people to unite were made in bracing and uncorny fashion. Threats of revolution were threaded alongside info about voting. But, as always, there was Crenshaw: “I’m from a place where you prolly can’t go / Speakin’ for some people that you prolly ain’t know.”



In April 2018, the Los Angeles–born street rapper Nipsey Hussle traveled to his father’s native Eritrea for the first time in 14 years. The trip found the musician, née Ermias Davidson Asghedom, both contemplative and triumphant: After a prolific run of mixtapes spanning more than a decade, the fiercely independent artist had recently released his major-label studio debut, Victory Lap. (The February 2018 record, which debuted at No. 4, would later earn him a nomination for Best Rap Album at this year’s Grammys.)

While in the East African country, Hussle and his brother, Samiel “Blacc Sam” Asghedom, followed their father’s lead: They traveled to historical sites and met the country’s divisive president; they were blessed by their 90-year-old grandmother with himbasha, the slightly sweet bread most often served during celebrations. Hussle was also interviewed by a number of state-run media outlets. In one interview, which was posted to Eritrea’s Ministry of Information website, the Eritrean journalist Billion Temesghen told the musician that his listeners, particularly those on the continent, saw his hard-won successes as their own. Hussle’s response at the time was gracious and affirming. “I want to thank my Eritrean fans for feeling connected to me and for supporting me. I feel extremely grateful,” he replied. “I am going to keep coming back here and make frequent returns … Thank you for keeping my name alive out here.”

But now, less than a year later, Hussle’s connection to his fans, Eritrean and American alike, has taken on a far more tragic valence. On Sunday afternoon, Hussle was fatally shot outside the store he co-owned in South L.A., the neighborhood Hussle celebrated in his music, advocacy, and philanthropic ventures. The Los Angeles Police Department has since apprehended a suspect in the case, but the rapper and activist’s killing remains a devastating blow to his family and to fans around the world, many of whom have likened him to the late Tupac Shakur.

The news of Hussle’s death spread quickly, especially among the rapper’s supporters—that day, an impromptu vigil was held outside the Asghedom brothers’ store, The Marathon Clothing. Local fans and friends lined the corner of Victoria Avenue and Crenshaw Boulevard, playing Hussle’s music and reflecting on a man who “poured positivity into the streets,” as one attendee told the Los Angeles Times. Within 24 hours, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook users had begun sharing flyers for candlelight vigils organized in cities around the country, including Atlanta, Chicago, New York, and Dallas.

Many of the memorials were organized specifically by Eritrean diasporic communities, their ad hoc appearances a direct reflection of the rapper’s importance to those who share his heritage. Among the first gatherings announced after the rally in Los Angeles was a vigil to be held Thursday in Washington, D.C., which boasts one of the largest East African populations in the United States.

Messai Belayneh, one of the D.C. organizers, was initially stunned when he heard of the rapper’s death Sunday evening. By Monday morning, the first generation Ethiopian American had reached out to Naomi Demsas, who works with the Eritrean Diaspora Network, to offer grieving fans a place to gather in the city. “We’re not just losing an artist; we’re not just losing a visionary—whether people are figuring it out now after his passing or whether they did appreciate him that much before,” Belayneh said when we spoke before the vigil. “We’re losing someone who can basically be related to anyone here.”

For Eritrean fans around the globe, Nipsey Hussle was never just a musician. The scrappy street rapper, born in 1985 to an African American mother and Eritrean immigrant father, had long been a rare model of public acceptance to young people who trace their heritage back to the small East African country, which formally won its independence from the neighboring Ethiopia in the early 1990s. (Ethiopia had annexed the nation under Emperor Haile Selassie’s rule in the 1960s, and the war for Eritrea’s independence was a multi-decade period of protracted bloodshed.)

The past year has seen the countries thaw their diplomatic tensions, and many Ethiopians and Eritreans refer to a sense of shared identity with the politically complicated umbrella term habesha. Indeed, the two nations share many cultural hallmarks—among them, food and some languages, including naming conventions. Ermias Asghedom, for example, is the kind of name that immediately evokes the Horn of Africa. Even so, many young Eritrean Americans, including Hussle and the actor Tiffany Haddish, grew up bristling at how often they were mistaken for their Ethiopian counterparts in the West—and feeling a deep sense of pride in their nation’s struggle for independence.
The Asghedom brothers, who were raised in their American mother’s Los Angeles home for many of their formative years, first traveled to Eritrea in 2004, when Hussle was 18. “As I got older, my pops tried to keep me involved with the culture by telling me the stories of the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, how he came to America, and about our family back home, because all that side of my family, my aunties, grandparents, is in Africa,” he told Complex in 2010. That first visit “put me in touch with my roots. If you don’t know your full-throttle history, the whole story of how you came to where you are, it’s kind of hard to put things together,” Hussle said. “That filled in a blank spot for me, as far as understanding myself.”

If Hussle’s trips to Eritrea helped the musician connect his American upbringing to his African roots, then his music—and the simple fact of his prominence—did the same for younger habeshas. The 24-year-old Ethiopian and Eritrean American rapper Aminé recalls discovering Hussle in his childhood—and finding inspiration to pursue music despite the admonitions he’d heard about choosing a stable career. “The first ever habesha person I ever saw do anything, like, dope that wasn’t a doctor or lawyer was Nipsey,” the Portland-bred musician said when we spoke over the phone recently. “I seen him and I was like, ‘Wow, this is crazy!’ And I showed it to my mom when I was in high school and she was like, ‘Oh, he’s Eritrean?!’ She was super shocked that someone was successful in something that wasn’t what the norm was.”
Belayneh, whose work in the D.C. area falls largely within entertainment and event planning, also looked to Hussle as a possibility model for creative pursuits. “It’s that extra step of connection. Not only was he the template of success for so many people, but for us, specifically, there’s that deeper root, like I know exactly what he could be going through in his upbringing, his household, the values that people have instilled in him family-wise,” Belayneh said of the late rapper’s significance to habesha youth. “So for us, it’s like the American dream is that much more attainable.”
Part of Hussle’s influence stemmed from his straightforward detailing of the violence and inequality he regularly faced in South Central, and in America writ large. In his music and in interviews, he didn’t shy away from discussing his gang affiliation—or from critiquing the systems of discrimination that foster violence within his neighborhood and others like it. Through the fact of his life, he also validated the experiences of young habeshas around the country whose trajectories didn’t bear the hallmarks of neat success stories. Hussle’s public persona wasn’t one concerned with adhering to restrictive notions of respectability.

Zimam Alemenew, one of the volunteers organizing the New York City vigil to be held Thursday, grew up listening to Hussle’s music in Fresno, California. Records such as Bullet Ain’t Got No Name Vol. 2 and the song “Hussle in the House” helped the Ethiopian American understand the violence that claimed her brother’s life when she was younger, and that continues to affect young habeshas in the area. “I’ll never forget—I used to go every summer to L.A., and I bought his mixtape. I never ever bought a mixtape before, and I bought his mixtape at a swap meet,” she told me, with a laugh. “I felt like because he was habesha, I wanted to buy his music, and because everything he was saying was so real and I felt it.”
Hussle wasn’t perfect, but he was certainly real. For many who belong to an immigrant group that grapples with both intra-community pressure and external hostility from broader American society, his openness about hardship was refreshing. Another New York City vigil coordinator, Abraham Paulos, spoke of Hussle’s transparency about his street life. “It’s a very, very complicated kind of existence,” the Eritrean American organizer said. “And some of [the youth] do have to find safety in the streets and in gang life. So [it’s important] to say, ‘We’re not gonna shun you; you’re not a disgrace to our community.’”

In the days following Hussle’s death, many of the expressions of grief from fans have included a poignant hashtag: #TheMarathonContinues. The virtual rallying cry takes its name from one of Hussle’s mixtapes, and it’s also a nod to the rapper’s store, as well as to the metaphor he often used to describe his life and career. (Marathons are also, it’s worth noting, the athletic event in which East Africans are most likely to claim gold.)

Many online dedications and fan-art renderings of Hussle have included a specific set of photos, in which he posed against a stark, royal-blue background. The Seattle-bred Eritrean American photographer Meron Menghistab, who shot the iconic photos for a March 2018 feature on BET, was on a flight when Hussle’s killing was first reported. “It was overwhelming,” he said of the news and attendant virality when we spoke via WhatsApp. “[My] first reaction [was], What does this mean for people who are still living that life? I think for me, that was the hardest part.”
In D.C., the rapper’s music has played at various Ethiopian- and Eritrean-owned establishments in the days following his death. “Hussle & Motivate” soundtracked a hookah lounge on U Street Monday evening; it played again at a different venue the following night, preceded immediately by Aminé’s “Caroline.” A day later, “Hussle & Motivate” pumped through speakers again, this time followed by the mournful Victory Lap track “Double Up.” Though Hussle has hovered over the nightlife and habesha corners of the city, the District’s formal honoring of him will happen Thursday at Malcolm X Park.

The New York City vigil, for its part, will be held at the General Grant National Memorial uptown, where local Eritreans and Eritrean Americans gather each year to celebrate Eritrean Martyrs Day. The holiday, which is also celebrated in Eritrea, pays tribute to the people who lost their life in the country’s long fight for independence. The event flyer, which features a photo of Hussle’s father, refers to Hussle as a martyr, as well. (In one exchange on the city’s habesha email listserv, to which I belong, a reply mentioning that Thursday evening might bring rain was met with a swift admonition: “It’s a marathon! Dedication and commitment!”)
The several dozen vigils, which began early this week and will extend through next week, will now take place in international cities, as well—among them, Vancouver, Perth, and Oslo. Hussle, or “Nebsi,” as many habeshas call him, will also have home-going services in both Asmara, the capital of Eritrea, and Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia. (Of the nickname, which is akin to being called “homie,” Hussle told Temesghen, the Eritrean journalist, “I was educated about the Tigrigna link to my name recently, and I am just so glad it makes sense in Tigrigna and there is no need at all to correct it. Let it be the way it is. That is how I want to keep it with my Eritrean friends and fans.”)

Those concerned with honoring his legacy have expressed, above all, a desire to remember Hussle’s commitment to preserving the communities he cared most about. The rapper’s father, Dawit Asghedom, worked at the Marathon Clothing store alongside his sons, but he was also invested in fighting for and with black people beyond Los Angeles and Eritrea. For volunteers such as Paulos, recognizing Hussle’s ties to L.A., and to black American history, is as key as remembering his Eritrean heritage: “Him being a part of … the habesha community and the black community in the U.S., and to be able to bring it all together and find a place of love for each other as black people, is a really important thing,” Paulos said. (The rapper’s relationship with the African American actor Lauren London has been gutting to think about in the past several days.)
For Aminé, himself an artist, paying Hussle’s gifts forward is a particularly urgent task. “Seeing someone like him do what he did for his community always made me feel like I wasn’t doing enough, and it inspired me to just wanna do more,” the rapper said. “Even with his death, it hurts and there’s no words to explain it … I wanna mourn, but I’m also inspired by it as well.”
“It … makes me feel like I have to put all hands on deck and just talk to my parents and talk to anyone I possibly can to figure out how I can help my community,” Aminé added. “Because you kinda feel ashamed of yourself that Nipsey died—he was doing so good and now we kinda have to pick up the pieces and continue that marathon that he was talking about.”



In 1665, Christopher Wren visited Paris, studying its architecture and taking notes for his restoration of the majestic, crumbling St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. The fourth church built on that site, Old St. Paul’s had taken roughly 200 years to construct, having finally been consecrated in 1240. Its windows are referenced in The Canterbury Tales. Catherine of Aragon was married in the cathedral to Henry VIII’s brother. The poet John Donne was buried there. And in 1666, the year after Wren returned from Paris, St. Paul’s was destroyed by fire, along with much of the rest of London. “I was infinitely concern’d to find that goodly Church St. Paules now a sad ruine, and that beautiful portico ... now rent in pieces,” the writer John Evelyn observed in his diary, concluding, “thus lay in ashes that most venerable Church, one of the most antient pieces of early piety in the Christian world.”

Notre-Dame de Paris, the most glorious and symbolic structure in the French capital, was completed in the 13th century, around the same time as the old St. Paul’s, and has survived it by more than 350 years. On Monday afternoon I was crossing the street in Paris when I happened to catch sight of Notre-Dame’s twin bell towers, stately and certain in the springtime, as familiar as the sun. Hours later, the cathedral was on fire, its 300-foot spire glowing orange before it dwindled into flames. In videos capturing the moment the spire collapsed, you can hear the cries of the people watching, people whose hearts were tearing at this blow to Paris’s sense of self. Notre-Dame, like all truly great monuments, is more than masonry. It encapsulates something about mankind itself: grandiosity, aspiration, imagination, faith.

What Notre-Dame might come to symbolize now, though, is resilience. Like so many of the incomparable cathedrals, mosques, and towers around the world, it’s found itself vulnerable, a strange quality for something hewn out of stone. Notre-Dame’s Gothic edifice, one of the most recognizable facades in all of Western architecture, is an astonishing interaction between art and physics, its intricate arches and carvings and portals seeming to defy possibility, even gravity. Its frame, though, has turned out to be simpler, and infinitely combustible. The structure holding up the roof, referred to romantically as “the forest,” was made of wooden beams, some of which dated back to the 12th century. Notre-Dame’s website has pictures of the charpente, a chaotic construction of planks and pegs. “Incendie, ce n’est pas impossible,” the description states. Fire isn’t impossible.

There’s no doubt that recovery, for Notre-Dame, will be arduous, and expensive, and dominated by the same kinds of arguments and recriminations that always accompany the commitment of public funds to colossal projects. What seems hopeful, though, is that it will be rebuilt, because the history of sacred structures is defined by exactly this cycle of ruin and repair. Cathedrals in Europe are palimpsests, built and rebuilt on the same sites over thousands of years: They bear additions and repairs—and sometimes total reconstruction—by countless hands. Notre-Dame, for example, is believed to have been put up on the original site of a temple to Jupiter. Four separate churches predated its consecration, and all were destroyed, or demolished, before the cornerstone for Notre-Dame was laid in the springtime of 1163, 856 years ago. Notre-Dame’s spire, the one that burned on Monday, was added in the 19th century, replacing the original, which had been weakened by the elements over the course of 500 years.

None of this makes the Notre-Dame fire less catastrophic, or less of a wound to the soul of Paris. But it’s comforting, maybe, to consider how many sites have recovered from the grievous damage of natural and man-made disasters. The old St. Paul’s was built after a fire in 1087 destroyed much of medieval London. It was damaged by storms in 1255, after which its roof was refashioned out of wood (a structural decision that would prove fatal four centuries later). Wren’s redesigned St. Paul’s took 33 years to construct, cost more than a million pounds, and is inarguably one of the most spectacular buildings in the world. Wren, the poet Deanna Rodger writes in “Reconstruction,” “knew how to rewrite, a surprise savior … [finding] flow in fire, and life in ash.”

The ultimate fragility of buildings such as Notre-Dame is a tragedy, but a very human one. Cathedrals bear in their construction all the fragments and blows of civilization, the moon shots and the arbitrary chaos of life over time. In Seville, the Cathedral of Saint Mary of the See incorporates in its design a bell tower that used to be a minaret, from the mosque that formerly stood on the site. In 1936, revolutionaries in Barcelona started a fire in the crypt of Antoni Gaudi’s Sagrada Família, destroying some of the blueprints for a basilica so impossibly ambitious that it remains unfinished even now. The Dresden Frauenkirche, a baroque church built in the 18th century, survived Prussian cannonballs during the Seven Years’ War, only to be obliterated by Allied incendiary bombs in 1945. For decades, the rubble remained, a monument to the cost of the war, until an 11-year reconstruction project was completed in 2005. The blackened stones of the bombed cathedral make up one-third of the building that stands today.

The saving grace of Monday’s tragedy is that the stone structure of Notre-Dame still stands, that most of its treasures seem to have been saved in time, that none of the 400 firemen who fought the blaze for nine hours lost their lives, and that much of the interior of the cathedral seems to have survived, including the three astonishing rose windows. France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, has pledged that Notre-Dame will be restored, describing it as “our history, our literature, our imagination ... the epicenter of our lives.”
But Notre-Dame also occupies a space beyond architecture or faith, a space in which buildings seem to represent the human capacity for endurance. “It is difficult not to sigh, not to wax indignant, before the numberless degradations and mutilations which time and men have both caused the venerable monument to suffer,” Victor Hugo wrote in The Hunchback of Notre Dame, a novel that itself spurred an outpouring of public support for the decaying cathedral’s repair in the 19th century. The fire on Monday was a catastrophe. What happens next has the potential to remind France—and the world—that extraordinary feats and recoveries are still possible.



This article contains spoilers for the Daniel Fish production of Oklahoma!

In 1979, during the opening of a smash-hit revival of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s Oklahoma!, the New York Times drama critic Walter Kerr walked up the aisle at intermission and noticed that everyone in the audience was beaming. “Some were smiling because they remember,” he wrote. “The others were smiling because they will.”

I felt much the same way when I saw the latest Broadway incarnation of Oklahoma! at the Circle in the Square Theatre in New York City—an oval-shaped auditorium in which the action takes place on what might be the blond-wood floor of a gymnasium or a barn. The house is so brightly lit for much of the show that the smiling faces of audience members seated across from me were visible for most of the first act.

But after intermission, there were empty seats where some of those smiling faces had been, and as the second act wore on, still other theatergoers walked out, evidently repelled by the director Daniel Fish’s dark and daring reinterpretation of this enduring classic from Broadway’s golden age. By the usually rousing final chorus of “Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin’,” many of those remaining in their seats—and many of the actors onstage—were in or near tears.

Oklahoma! turned 76 in March, and the newest production changes barely a word of the original text. Nevertheless, Fish renders a show that is most famous for its “bright, golden haze on the meadow” in chiaroscuro, highlighting the somber, ominous undertones that were there from the beginning, when the show landed with such a radical naturalism and authenticity that it revolutionized musical theater forever.

For anyone just arrived from Mars, the basic plot of Oklahoma! revolves around nothing more earth-shattering than which of two suitors—a cocky cowboy named Curly McLain, or a brooding farmhand named Jud Fry—will take Laurey Williams, a winsome farm girl, to a party. But just beneath the surface, sex and violence and the tension between order and lawlessness are always lurking. Fish’s version, which began as a student production at Bard College in 2007, makes those subterranean themes explicit, and in the process comes as close as anything could to re-creating the frisson that the original production must have packed on March 31, 1943.

Fish does so, in the first instance, by stripping the show to its bare essentials. There is no overture, no chorus, no corps de ballet; the entire cast consists of just 12 players. The orchestra is a seven-piece band that performs onstage in full view of the audience, its roots-music arrangements by Daniel Kluger more Ralph Stanley than Robert Russell Bennett, the show’s legendary original orchestrator. The famous dream ballet in which the hero is torn between two lovers pays only the barest passing reference to Agnes de Mille’s original choreography (it has been reimagined by John Heginbotham), and it appears at the beginning of the second act, not at the end of the first. Indeed, the production doesn’t have much dancing at all. Some audience members are seated at long tables at the edge of the playing space, where bubbling, red Crock-Pots hold the chili that will be served at intermission.

But those are details—and in the case of the chili, a bit of a stunt. The essence of Fish’s reinterpretation is the character of Jud Fry, played by Patrick Vaill (who originated the role as a Bard student) not as a burly lout—think Rod Steiger in the 1955 movie version—but as a lean, tortured outsider condemned to a life by himself “like a cobweb on a shelf,” as he sings in his agonized soliloquy, “Lonely Room.” This Jud is a much more sympathetic contender for Laurey’s affections, and his sex appeal is palpable. In the original libretto, when Laurey finally not only rejects Jud’s advances but also fires him from his job, he retaliates by pulling a knife on Curly and dies after falling on it in the fight that ensues. In this production, Jud presents Curly with a pistol as a wedding present and more or less begs to be killed. Damon Daunno, who up to this point has been a genial guitar-plucking Curly with a Harry Nilsson tenor-baritone, is suddenly splattered with blood all over his white wedding suit, as is Laurey, played by Rebecca Naomi Jones. So when the community swiftly acquits Curly on the grounds of self-defense in a summary trial, the result feels less like justice and more like rough complicity in vigilantism. Hence the quivering, feel-bad ending, and the tears.

Some Rodgers and Hammerstein purists have already hotly debated whether this climax—slightly softened since the first professional staging at Bard’s SummerScape festival in 2015—is necessary or even valid, and God only knows what the musical’s creators would make of it. They were both famous for insisting that their shows be performed with a frozen-in-amber fidelity to the original productions—even if those originals had been cobbled together with blood, sweat, and caffeine in out-of-town tryouts in New Haven, Connecticut, and in Boston. In a tense exchange of letters with the director Joshua Logan, with whom he had tangled over Logan’s changes to the first national company of South Pacific, Hammerstein made his case for sticking not only to the original text but also to the original staging:

Making changes can so easily become an accumulative pastime, not only on the part of one who makes them, but—and this is the main danger—those who follow are likely to be encouraged too much to make further changes. “Oh!” say they, “you can make changes, can you? Well, now I’ll try my hand.” And after a succession of directors who have not had the sacredness of the original work drummed into them and the inviolability of the original conception, all add their own and put their dirty little fingers in the pie and what have you got—Hollywood!

But for all his deserved reputation as an earnest sentimentalist, Hammerstein was also a thorough cosmopolitan, and a consummate man of the theater. He once said that if sex is not at the core of a story, it’s probably not worth telling. So I’d like to think he would admire this production’s frankness on that score. And it’s also worth noting that Theresa Helburn, one of Oklahoma!’s original producers (it had been her idea to turn an old 1930 play called Green Grow the Lilacs into a musical), described the difficulty of raising financing for the first production by noting the reaction of skeptical backers. “Musicals, they said in disgust,” she recalled in her autobiography, “don’t have murders in the second act.” So the notion that Jud’s death is at least a kind of murder was there from the beginning, too.

Rodgers’s music is, of course, indelible, but what this newest production—along with another that ran last summer at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival—really proves is the indestructibility and the adaptability of Hammerstein’s book. The casting of the Oregon production, conceived by the festival’s artistic director, Bill Rauch, was gender-inclusive. That is, Curly and Laurey were lesbians; the secondary romantic couple, Will Parker and Ado Andy, were gay men; Laurey’s Aunt Eller was a trans woman; and Ali Hakim, the traveling peddler, was an exuberant bisexual man. I saw that production in the company of Ted Chapin, the longtime chief creative officer of the Rodgers & Hammerstein organization, now a unit of the Concord Bicycle Music Company, on the day that Justice Anthony Kennedy, the Supreme Court’s swing vote on gay marriage, announced his retirement. When Curly proposed to Laurey by saying, “Country-a-changin’, got to change with it!” and “Keep up ’th the way things is goin’ in this here crazy country!” the audience offered up something between a sigh and a groan of recognition and regret. If Fish’s production seems emotionally rooted in contemporary America, Rauch’s version, with its more traditional period costumes and design, seemed to float in a kind of arcadian idyll, an Oklahoma! that probably never was, but that open-minded modern audiences could still imagine.

That this warhorse of a play can speak to 21st-century audiences with topical relevance should come as no surprise, because that is precisely what the first production did. The original Oklahoma! opened barely 15 months after Pearl Harbor and was received by wartime audiences not just as a story about incipient statehood in Indian territory in 1907 but also as a reflection of the sacrifice—and, yes, the shattering violence—that World War II would require. Our own global political moment is fraught in different ways, of course, but it is fraught all the same. Without resorting to any overt references to current American politics, these new productions might serve as touchstones of resiliency and fortitude for audiences in Donald Trump’s divided America. “You gotta be hearty,” Aunt Eller tells Laurey at the story’s end. “You got to be. You cain’t deserve the sweet and tender things in life less’n you’re tough.”

So how is Oklahoma! doin’ as it embarks on its fourth quarter century as the model of the modern American musical? The answer seems obvious, inescapable: just fine.



For Titus Andronicus, one of the 21st century’s best rock acts, anger isn’t simple. The singer Patrick Stickles boasts a rabid-badger snarl, and his band’s ruckus is worthy of both humming along to and kicking walls to. But the songs turn and twist in surprising ways, and the singer undercuts his every rebellious slogan with confessions about his own complicity. A track off the band’s 2008 debut explained his backstory in typically self-flagellating fashion: “I learned to play the guitar in the seventh grade in order to convince everyone I was a renegade … I couldn’t fool anyone, I couldn’t even fool myself!”

Something feels different on Titus Andronicus’s sixth album, An Obelisk. The first song is a fierce denunciation of mediocrity, capitalism, and the state of the globe rendered in outward-looking, protest-ready manifesto statements. Stickles’s signature neuroses are still here, but they’re only winked at. “It’s a sorry situation, entire world’s going to hell,” he sings. “But I in no way blame myself.” Later, on the single “(I Blame) Society,” he howls, “I’m not sick, it’s the world that is.”

The singer, of course, doth protest too much. An Obelisk is a concept album sung from the point of view of a somewhat arrogant outcast on a journey toward self-awareness (he’s nicknamed Troubleman, a term that references the band’s original record label as well as the ’70s blaxploitation film soundtracked by Marvin Gaye). Its bracing, rambunctious songs scan as straightforward, but there’s nuance if you listen closely.

Hoping to unpack some of the album’s story, as well as the wider political-punk traditions Titus Andronicus is working in, I spoke with Stickles over the phone in April. This conversation has been edited.

Kornhaber: I was just reading an interview where you said, “I don’t tell any lies in my music—it’s all taken from real life.” In the press materials for An Obelisk, you say the album has a narrator, and it’s not you. How do those square?

Stickles: Well, the artist can only ever speak about their own experience, right? The totality of our understanding of the universe comes from our own perceptions, so that’s the only thing that I feel qualified to speak about.

But certain listeners look at a song and take it to mean that the artist is saying, “This is how to live.” People see somebody up on the stage and they think this person is heroic and enlightened in some way. I don’t intend for it to be taken that way. By using this narrator I am able to represent experiences from my own life without necessarily elevating them to some rarefied sphere of wisdom.

Kornhaber: On the first song, “Just Like Ringing a Bell,” you’re railing against an “inferior version of rock and roll.” The straightforwardness of the message surprised me. But you’re saying it sarcastically, no?

Stickles: Yes and no. I do agree with the narrator that beautiful and inspiring things in life, filtered through our consumer capitalist culture, end up corrupted. It’s the same thing on “(I Blame) Society.” I do think that society has many ills, and the narrator makes a number of fair points. So it’s not exactly sarcastic. I wanted to use a narrator that is a little bit more naive than I am—but that is as naive as I have been at certain points in my life. Not naive in the sense of being wrong. But the narrator hasn’t come to understand his own position in the systems that are oppressing.

Kornhaber: What can that more naive narrator say that you yourself can’t?

Stickles: I’ve been a big fan of the second wave of British punk music. This is when punk music ceased to be made primarily by art-school students and became more of a working-class thing in the hands of bands like Cock Sparrer, Angelic Upstarts, Cockney Rejects, Sham 69, Red London, and also, to a certain degree, my favorite band, Crass. Their lyrics are extremely direct and leave very little room to doubt how the singer feels about whatever topic they happen to be addressing, which typically is things like, The upper class is trying to screw us. I’m into that.  

Channeling this era of music, and affording myself the opportunity to speak about these things in a comparably direct way—that’s quite a fun thing to do. But it wouldn’t be fair of me to be purely pointing the finger at somebody else. When you point one finger at another, there’s three more that are pointed back at you. This has been the punch line of many Titus Andronicus songs. I don’t want to just come out and say the establishment is fucked up to a catastrophic degree. At the same time I don’t want to invalidate moments in my life when I have felt these feelings very strongly. From that urge comes this concept of using this narrator who we can follow on an intellectual journey.

Kornhaber: We’re in a politicized cultural moment when it’s pretty common to hear people say things like “I blame society” about any given subject. Is part of the album asking people whether they’re right when they blame society?

Stickles: The narrator is basically saying, “None of this is my fault.” But it should be clear that this narrator is not without a certain amount of responsibility for his own dissatisfaction. That’s why the narrator often tells the listener he’s not sick—“I’m not sick, it’s the world that is.” That should throw up a pretty big red flag that the narrator actually is pretty sick.

Kornhaber: Trying to deliver the slogan but also criticizing the person who’s delivering it is a tricky balance. Do you worry about being misunderstood and being taken in earnest entirely?

Stickles: Of course I’m worried about that. That’s a more likely result than people properly unpacking what it is that I’m trying to do. You can work as hard as you want and make sure that every level of meaning is exactly how you want it. At a certain point you have to put the thing out into the world, and then you don’t have as much authority over it anymore. That’s something that has definitely bothered me in the past, [but] it’s just the reality of the artist’s life.

Kornhaber: When has it particularly bothered you before?

Stickles: I shouldn’t get too petty about it. But the biggest example would be a song called “Theme From ‘Cheers.’” Basically, it’s about getting drunk. It’s a lot of Titus Andronicus fans’ favorite song because some of them think the takeaway is that getting drunk is awesome. That wasn’t really what I intended. It was more a song about such sorrow that will drive a person to numb their brain. But certain people take it as, I’m going to take this as my invitation to get even more hammered than I already was. Probably throw my big sweaty body up on anybody that’s in my periphery. As a consequence, that one doesn’t make it onto the set list too frequently anymore.

Kornhaber: Who is Troubleman?

Stickles: Troubleman is the name of the narrator. That’s how he thinks of himself, anyways. He confesses that he is constantly making trouble for himself and others. Early on in the record, the listener is meant to try and juxtapose this confession that he makes about himself with the accusation that he levels at the world around him.

Kornhaber: Does it matter that Troubleman is a man?

Stickles: Well, it would be pointless to argue that men have not had an outsized role in creating the catastrophic situation that we’re now living in. His masculinity has definitely got to be part of the reason why he acts like a jerk. But if there’s a person who doesn’t identify as a man who can relate with the narrator, then that’s fine by me. Not that our narrator is going around getting into brawls all the time, but the way that he lets his fear manifest as anger is a pretty common masculine trait.

Kornhaber: We were just talking about how with “Theme from ‘Cheers,’” people throw themselves around recklessly at concerts. It sounded like you were talking about men in particular.

Stickles: Yeah, I am. I don’t like to necessarily gender things this way, but at a gig, typically the No. 1 person who will take the most liberties to ruin everybody else’s good time, these are men more often than not.

Kornhaber: This is something you regularly call out on stage, right?

Stickles: Yep, I sure do. Which is not to say that I want everybody to sit in chairs. Dancing and having fun is cool, and [if] people jostle their elbows a little bit, it’s all in fun. But when certain individuals think that the dance floor is some consequence-free zone and they can let their inner wild animal loose and nobody can tell them anything about it, I don’t agree with that.

You can draw a parallel between that and the ongoing discussions we’re having more and more these days about unwanted touching. We’ve all seen this stuff in the news about Joe Biden. I think it would be good if we could have a similar discussion about respecting boundaries in the context of the rock-and-roll concert. They’re related: People feel like they’re entitled to take liberties with other people’s bodies and their personal space.

Kornhaber: You’ve said you’re using the concept of “an obelisk” to refer to power inequality, because an obelisk gets narrower at the top. Were you trying to also play on how ancient a structure it is? Your “(I Blame) Society” video makes clear that you were thinking at least of the Washington Monument.

Stickles: As well as Cleopatra’s Needle, which is an obelisk we have in New York City. That thing’s about 3,000 years old, built it in Egypt.

You’re right, it’s something that’s had a lot of symbolic power for a very long time. The abuses of powers that we’re seeing in the news, they’re often startling, but they’re not exactly brand-new ideas. People think that our president is a pretty far-out dude, the likes of which we haven’t seen before. To a certain extent that’s true. But there’ve also been big guys like him forever. These were the same kind of guys who were building these obelisks so many thousands of years ago.

Kornhaber: Do you think it helps to put people like the president in an eternal perspective? Or is there a danger of throwing up one’s hands and just saying this is how the world is?

Stickles: Perhaps there is danger of that. The way that I think about it is: Maybe we won’t hear so much about our president in a couple more years. Maybe he’ll be gone. But the system that created him will remain. We can’t just treat the symptoms. We can’t just think if we get rid of this one guy then everything will be okay. We need to come up with some kind of thorough overhaul if we’re going to do anything different. We have to recognize that our systems are only as good or as evil as the people operating them.

In that one song about blaming society, I talk about how “an isolated incident is a thing of fiction.” All these horrors we see on a daily basis, they didn’t happen in a vacuum. Which is not to say individuals don’t have any degree of accountability, which is something that the narrator doesn’t necessarily recognize, but he definitely will learn.

Kornhaber: So he does learn?

Stickles: By the end of the album he has at least learned that he’s not really that special. As much as he feels like he’s isolated and alienated, that’s how a lot of people feel all the time. He recognizes that he may not be able to single-handedly dismantle the system, but the thing he is able to control is the way he chooses to treat the people around him. You should treat people with empathy, and recognize that they’re as lonely and isolated as you might feel.

Kornhaber: I saw you tweeting about Beto O’Rourke stealing your sweater look.

Stickles: He’s stealing my swag.

Kornhaber: What do you make of his punk shtick?

Stickles: I’m not a fan of that. His punk talk chafes me. I don’t like the stuff that I care about deeply being tossed around like some kind of political [tool]. If you were really punk you wouldn’t even think to run for president. That’s one of the least punk things you could do.

Kornhaber: A punk couldn’t be president? No revolution from the inside?

Stickles: I dunno, maybe. I can’t see how people could study the teachings of punk and then infer that running for president is a good idea. It’s a really good way for revolutionary ideas to lose all their teeth. We sell the kids so many false images of rebellion that when they see the real thing, they don’t even know what to do with it. They don’t even recognize it.



Pose, FX’s vibrant series about ball culture in 1988 New York, is defined by joy and by love, but most of all by presence—the idea that simply being yourself in a specific space can be a revolutionary act. That space can be a dance floor, or it can be the set of a mainstream TV drama. The characters of Pose, the house mothers and queens and LGBTQ voguers who congregated in Season 1 to compete against one another’s exuberant charades, are asserting their presence in a world that’s usually ill-inclined to receive it. And the series is desperately aware of how much that means. “The reality is, for trans women of color, the current average life expectancy is 35 years old,” Pose’s co-creator Steven Canals told The Wrap in an interview this week. “It’s critically important for us to have trans women of color up on-screen not just surviving, but thriving.”

Pose is a unicorn for so many reasons. It has the largest cast of trans actors ever assembled for a scripted series, while also being committed to representation behind the scenes. (Its creative team includes the author and activist Janet Mock and the musician and writer Our Lady J.) Pose also defiantly rejects the ways in which LGBTQ characters have historically been portrayed on television as subplots or symbols of suffering. The show, as Pilot Viruet wrote in an essay for TV Guide this week, is “a triumphant celebration of queerness and community,” one that refuses to let its characters become fodder for teachable moments or trauma porn. Its overriding mood is one of optimism and hope. The problem is that reality—that same reality Canals spoke about—keeps intruding anyway, and the show’s ebullient tone and its bleaker scenes can sometimes be discordant.

The first season of Pose introduced Blanca (Mj Rodriguez), a member of the ballroom scene’s House of Abundance, whose HIV diagnosis spurred her to strike out on her own and become a house mother to all the dancers and vulnerable “children” she could nurture. They included Angel (Indya Moore), a sex worker, and Damon (Ryan Jamaal Swain), a dancer whose parents threw him out of their house for being gay. Blanca’s House of Evangelista faced off against Elektra (Dominique Jackson), the ferocious sovereign of the House of Abundance, at balls emceed by the designer and community linchpin Pray Tell (Billy Porter). These festivities of radiant spectacle, with their themed tableaux and gestural high fashion, played out against the backdrop of the AIDS crisis, which claimed Pray Tell’s partner as an early victim. (Season 1’s subplot featuring Angel’s lover, a Donald Trump employee played by Evan Peters, and his cocaine-whiffing boss, portrayed by James Van Der Beek, has been excised, a move that rightfully focuses the show back on Blanca.)

Season 2 flashes forward to 1990, a time when AIDS was devastating New York’s queer community. The most moving scene of the four episodes made available for review comes right at the beginning, as Pray and Blanca take a boat to Hart Island to honor one of their friends. There, they come face to face with the cruelty of the epidemic: unclaimed bodies in plywood boxes buried in mass graves, quarantined far away from the city. On one side of the island, visitors have left pebbles bearing the names of loved ones to commemorate people whose family and friends couldn’t afford proper burials—a field pitted with inscribed stones. Later, Pray runs into a nurse, Judy (Sandra Bernhard), at a memorial and tells her that it is his 210th service. It’s her 452nd. The first to hit 1,000, she quips, “wins a free toaster.”

The episode, which is written by Canals with Pose’s other co-creators, Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk, sets a mood that feels reverent and sad, and that underscores the stakes of what Pose’s characters are fighting for. At night, on the dance floor, the various houses compete to be seen, but also to be appreciated in a world that affirms their worth. (Or, in the case of Pray Tell’s scathing commentary, to be lovingly shredded to pieces.) Pray and Blanca are also compelled by Judy to join the ACT UP protests advocating for more federal investment in researching AIDS, in scenes that echo Murphy’s 2014 adaptation of The Normal Heart. And on MTV, Madonna’s “Vogue” is threatening to bring ball culture into the mainstream, a development that Blanca quixotically hopes will make her children stars.

As ever, Pose excels at portraying performance. Its ballroom scenes are shimmering dioramas of exuberance and expression; its characters reinvent themselves as historical divas, Shakespearian characters, and avant-garde fashion plates. Creative energy diffuses around the room like light beams from a mirror ball. The fairy-tale vibe is contagious and, across the community, dreams are actually coming true: Moore’s Angel is pursuing work as a model, while Rodriguez’s Blanca is setting up her own business, in a story that loops in a sharklike businesswoman played by Patti LuPone. But there are periodic reminders of how vulnerable Pose’s characters are to predatory photographers, bigoted landlords, snake-oil salesmen, and even a white megastar who’s appropriating their culture all the way to the top of the charts.

There are also moments of tragedy that jibe awkwardly with the show’s zany comic interludes. Pose has always been a worthwhile series rather than a well-crafted one, and its writing in Season 2 veers all over the place, between heartfelt, didactic, over-explanatory, and anachronistic. (Elektra establishes a new house named Wintour after “the legendary editor in chief of the sacred text that is Vogue”—who, in 1990, had only just been hired—and then declares, “Wintour is coming.”) But strangest of all is the way the series fluctuates in its tone and sense of humor. This is a show that seems to stress the imperative of treating the dead and dying with dignity, no matter the circumstances. And yet it’s also willing to throw in a screwball, episode-long caper about the gruesome disposal of an inconvenient corpse.

Pose is at its best when it owns the inherent seriousness of its subject matter, acknowledging the scale of deaths within the LGBTQ community during the 1990s and the shameful truth that trans women of color continue to be as vulnerable now as they were then. It’s understandable, and admirable, that Canals wants to tell a different story than audiences are used to, one in which estranged parents show up when they’re needed, faith and kindness are rewarded, and ball culture is a salve for the cruelty of the outside world. But there are ways to balance comedy and tragedy so that they don’t threaten to undermine each other. Still, in a handful of scenes, Pose pulls this act off with perfect equipoise, a model of how to embody light in the dark.



In his new book, the Chicago-based journalist Jim DeRogatis, who has reported on the R&B singer R. Kelly’s alleged sex crimes for almost 20 years, notes that he’s heard a similar refrain from nearly everyone he’s interviewed about the star. “Few said they hated Kelly,” DeRogatis writes in Soulless: The Case Against R. Kelly. “It’s always, ‘Brother needs help. Brother’s got to stop.’”

When he first received an anonymous fax alleging that Kelly had a “problem” with “young girls,” in November 2000, DeRogatis was a music critic at the Chicago Sun-Times. In the years that followed, he reported on Kelly’s various settlements and criminal cases. DeRogatis and his colleague, Abdon Pallasch, broke the news of the now-infamous tape that allegedly depicted the singer having sex with—and urinating on—a minor. (This, too, was sent to DeRogatis anonymously.) Soulless, out this week, chronicles DeRogatis’s attempts to report on, and attract journalistic allies in covering, the complicated saga of Kelly’s manipulation machine. The artist has not responded to the book’s publication, but he has always denied committing any of the crimes he’s been accused of.

Soulless is excruciatingly comprehensive: It maps out the insurmountable legal hurdles and institutional apathy that have accompanied DeRogatis’s endeavors to report on the accusations against Kelly. The veteran reporter recounts in vivid detail not only the depravity of Kelly’s alleged behavior, but also the insouciance—or worse, active support—with which his associates, fans, and legal gatekeepers handled him after it was revealed. Soulless implicitly challenges their characterization of Kelly as a despondent sufferer in need of nebulous, benevolent “help” as opposed to accountability.

DeRogatis’s book presents previously unreported information, including a particularly troubling revelation from Kelly’s first trial attorney, Ed Genson. The dream hampton–produced docuseries Surviving R. Kelly, which aired on Lifetime in January, quoted Genson as saying he believed Kelly was “guilty as hell.” Now Soulless references this late-in-life admission from Genson, and also reveals a more specific, clinical condemnation. After quoting Kelly, who didn’t admit guilt but said he’d “done a lot of things in my life right now that I’m trying to get help for,” DeRogatis offers a rare glimpse at one preventive measure that the singer later shirked:

Two of his handlers told me they forced him to take medication to curb his sex drive (his attorney Ed Genson later confirmed that, saying, “I had him go to a doctor to get shots, libido-killing shots”) and he talked to a professional about his sexual addiction and compulsion to pursue young girls. Kelly saw Dr. Carl Bell, director of public and community psychiatry at the University of Illinois, and one of the most respected therapists in Chicago’s black community. Not surprising, given patient confidentiality, Dr. Bell declined to speak to me.

The interview in which Kelly calmly alluded to his need for “help” first aired in May 2002, after the emergence of the notorious tape. Kelly’s long conversation with the BET Tonight journalist Ed Gordon, who DeRogatis writes had a reputation for being “tough but fair,” was intended to function as “the opening salvo of an aggressive campaign to minimize the damage to an incredibly lucrative career.” Kelly was joined by his “spiritual advisor,” the Reverend James Meeks, who was the pastor of Salem Baptist Church on Chicago’s South Side. These were shrewd decisions, the hallmark of an artist who understood the importance of keeping the public on his side. Kelly, even at his most grotesque, has always been a performer.

Because the tape provided seemingly concrete evidence of his predilections, DeRogatis writes, the singer’s camp expected him to be indicted. Kelly did indeed face child-pornography charges, and his case was adjudicated in June 2008 after a six-year trial delay, during which Kelly continued to release hits that often made winking references to his alleged crimes. (Vincent Gaughan, the Chicago judge who granted delays to Kelly’s defense team all those years, also oversaw the 2018 trial of the police officer Jason Van Dyke, who was eventually convicted of second-degree murder and 16 counts of aggravated assault after killing the unarmed black teenager Laquan McDonald in 2014. The judge “tried to conduct that trial the same way” he did Kelly’s, DeRogatis writes, until “the Illinois Supreme Court scolded Gaughan for what Chicago media publications called ‘patently unconstitutional conduct.’”)

During Kelly’s trial, Gaughan also refused to admit any evidence pointing to Kelly’s alleged pattern of behavior, DeRogatis writes. The prosecution was barred from mentioning anything outside the scope of the specific child-pornography charges, including the fact that Kelly had already married the singer Aaliyah using forged court documents that indicated she was 18 (and not 15, as she had actually been at the time). Or that he had settled a dispute out of court, with a young woman named Tiffany Hawkins, who alleged that they began a relationship while she was a minor, and that Kelly became abusive. Prior to the tape’s appearance, Kelly had also married and allegedly abused one of his dancers, Andrea Lee. Though Lee hadn’t sought criminal proceedings, the rumors of Kelly’s persistent behavior had been mounting.

After Kelly’s contentious trial, during which he was found not guilty, DeRogatis reports in Soulless that the singer stopped taking the libido-reducing drugs his handlers insisted on. He stopped seeing Bell. Kelly reportedly abandoned therapy and pharmaceutical interventions following his acquittal; since then, there’s no evidence of him seeking any kind of assistance to curb his behavior. Instead, he met Jerhonda Johnson (now Jerhonda Pace), then only 15 years old, outside the courthouse. Of Kelly’s alleged return to pursuing young girls, DeRogatis told Variety, “We can’t absolve him of this sickness. How many wake-up calls does a person deserve?”

As a teenager, Pace was a Kelly superfan who regularly attended the musician’s trials; like many other young black women in Chicago and beyond, she rejoiced upon his acquittal. “They can’t call him a pedophile anymore,” she said at the time. “They can’t say he likes little girls! They don’t have proof of that, because he’s innocent now, he’s free!”

Now, 11 years later, Kelly is facing 11 new counts of sexual assault and abuse stemming from Pace’s account of their multiyear relationship. Pace first told her story to DeRogatis in a 2017 story for BuzzFeed News; she said she’d been held captive alongside numerous other women as part of a sex cult that Kelly orchestrated. (Kelly has maintained that his relationship with Pace and the other women was consensual; two of them recently defended him in a bizarre interview with CBS News’s Gayle King.)
These harrowing allegations, among others, were also brought forth in Surviving R. Kelly. The singer was arrested and briefly jailed in February, after the documentary inspired a rare groundswell of public backlash and judicial inquiry. But these new charges, for which Kelly is due to appear in court today, are the most serious that have ever been brought against him. Should he be convicted of the felonies, Kelly could face a maximum of 30 years in prison.

Soulless was completed before these charges were made public, but even without their inclusion, the book is a devastating, thorough accounting of Kelly’s alleged abuses as systematized predation. In explicitly outlining the multiple junctures at which Kelly, his supporters, law enforcement, and journalists have failed the dozens of young black women whom Kelly is accused of abusing, DeRogatis definitively—if also wearily—conveys the sheer magnitude of Kelly’s relative impunity.

That the artist’s alleged victims—DeRogatis notes there are at least 48—might one day see some semblance of justice is a shaky consolation. But even now, Kelly’s only references to his behavior have been cloaked in manipulative self-pity. His pleas for help still come at the expense of the women most affected by his alleged problem.



Years before the BoJack Horseman creator Raphael Bob-Waksberg would earn critical acclaim for his animated Netflix show about a depressed equine actor, the writer attempted a different kind of artistic leap: He tried to woo a woman with his own version of a mixtape. Over the course of a month, he assembled all of his favorite poems, short stories, and articles into a document that he then photocopied at Kinko’s.

Speaking at a diner in New York City late last month, Bob-Waksberg recalled thinking, “She’s really going to see everything that I feel, and she’s gonna know me so well.” But the would-be recipient rebuffed his attempt to give her the scrapbook in person, so he kept working on it for himself. And Bob-Waksberg still carries the influences he charted back then. The BoJack showrunner’s debut short-story collection, Someone Who Will Love You in All Your Damaged Glory, channels much of the same caustic humor and heartrending dialogue as the Netflix series. The stories alternate between surreal, sci-fi–inspired tales and more grounded vignettes, but many are a poignant mixture of both tones.

The collection’s opening story, for example, begins with a fairly mundane setting: A first date takes a curious turn when a woman is offered salted circus cashews by her suitor. Bob-Waksberg heightens the tension slowly. The story goes on to detail the message written on the cashew can, which reveals the woman’s ambivalence—in the past, she’s encountered a series of cans filled with snakes. It’s an absurd premise, to be sure, but the trepidation resonates. The fine print on the can’s label ends the story: “This time is different; I promise you it’s different. Why would I lie to you? Why would I want to hurt you? This time there is no snake waiting. This time things are going to be wonderful.”

Not every story in the collection ends so hopefully, but Bob-Waksberg still conveys a tenuous reverence for love and those who continue to seek it even in the face of disappointment. He traces the tenor of both the show and the new book to many early inspirations: among them, the author David Rakoff’s Love, Dishonor, Marry, Die, Cherish, Perish: A Novel; Jonathan Safran Foer’s “A Primer for the Punctuation of Heart Disease”; Katherine Heiny’s “How to Give the Wrong Impression”; Sarah Manguso’s 300 Arguments; and the work of George Saunders.
Ahead of his book’s June release, The Atlantic spoke with Bob-Waksberg about the book, writing across different formats, and the role art plays in shaping expectations about love and romance. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Hannah Giorgis: How did you approach writing short stories as opposed to TV?

Raphael Bob-Waksberg: A lot of these stories predate BoJack … I think all writing is an attempt to express yourself and to articulate feelings that you feel. I am often surprised when people take something away from my writing or relate to it because I think, No, it’s about me!

One of my favorite TV shows of all time is Freaks and Geeks. [It’s the kind of show] where I am shocked that anybody else could like it because it feels so personal and specific to me. I don’t think that is because of the incidents or the characters. I think it’s something about the writing and the acting that wormed its way inside of me, and that is kind of the writing that I aspire to.

I try to think of new ways to describe things that I feel and hope that some of those feelings will be either universal, or will be so convincing that you’ll think they’re universal when you read them. You’ll be tricked into thinking, Oh, I’ve had this feeling. Have you? Or did I just do a good job of describing it? [Laughs]

Giorgis: Did you think in terms of visuals as you were working on the stories?Bob-Waksberg: Working on a TV show has really helped me to think visually, because I [naturally] think in terms of dialogue, or internal thoughts, first. Often, as a reader, I am less interested in scene description … I don’t have a lot of character descriptions [in the collection] because I like the idea that people can read this story and feel like, Oh, this is me. I think when you hear, “Her blue eyes sparkle,” you might go, Oh, I guess it’s not me then.
Some of the stories, I realized, as I was working on them, that the gender didn’t matter. It’s like, what if I just got rid of all the gender indicators and let this be ambiguous? Sometimes that ambiguity gets in the way, but that’s a challenge. You don’t want to [create] this vague everyperson.

Giorgis: Sure, especially when the category of “everyperson” has so often not been neutral. It’s usually meant as “white male.” How did you think about establishing moments of specificity, as you do with some of the characters’ names, which nod to specific ethnicities?Bob-Waksberg: That’s a great question. Emika [from one of the last stories in the collection] is named after a friend of mine from high school [who’s] half Japanese. I wanted my book to feel diverse without me putting on voices that I didn’t have the authority to put on. And so I tried to, yes, sprinkle in some names that were indicative of some things, as well as names that were not necessarily indicative of anything and open to interpretation. And then also, sometimes, not naming characters.

Giorgis: Can you tell me a bit about the surrealist elements in the book? The thing about love, of course, is that your predicament always feels like it’s the most dramatic, earthshaking thing in the world, even—and perhaps especially—when it’s fairly ordinary.

Bob-Waksberg: Like we’re superheroes, right? But we’re just people … I think often when the idea for a story comes to me, there are two hooks. There’s the first hook, which is the first paragraph or page of like, Look at this crazy world we’re in. And then after I play around with that [premise] for a little bit, I gotta figure out what this story is really about. Because otherwise, it’s just a shtick.

I started in sketch comedy, and that’s not what I’m doing anymore. I don’t want my short stories to feel like a comedy sketch. I try to find in all of [my stories], what is the emotional hook? What is this story actually about? What is this character going through?

I want to make sure the form matches the function, that the fun gimmick and the story go together. I think if the story comes first and you gotta come up with a fun gimmick, it feels forced. But if you have a fun way in and you’re like, All right, how do I justify this? That’s a challenge ... How do I ground this in something real, and how do I slowly pull back the layers to reveal this thing that it always was—Giorgis: I’m gonna breeze past the obvious Trojan-horse jokes here—Bob-Waksberg: We do that a lot on BoJack, too. A lot of how we find stories is like—all right, what’s the silliest thing we’ve done? [Early on in the show] we have this adult woman dating this character who’s [really just] three kids stacked on top of each other in a trench coat. So that is very silly. But what does that [joke] say about the lies we tell ourselves to be in a relationship? Or how can we, when they break up, feel a little bad for them even though this whole conceit is very silly? My book is a lot of that, a lot of finding these fun worlds to play around with and then finding the real heart.

Giorgis: I have to ask you about “Rufus,” the story told entirely from the perspective of the titular dog. What inspired it?

Bob-Waksberg: People are shocked I wrote the story, because I was never an animal person. And then I started dating this woman who had a dog and now we’re married. And now he is my dog. And I love him so much. His name is Stilton. He’s a very good boy. I’ve really become the thing that I hated because I never cared about other people’s dogs. When I first started dating this woman who’s now my wife, I simultaneously didn’t want her to know that I felt this way about dogs, but I simultaneously wanted credit for how good I was with the dog.
I think there’s a wide range of literature and film from the perspective of dogs. But I felt like in most of the stuff that I’d seen, either the dog was really stupid—including on my show—or [it was] the opposite, the dog is all-knowing, and he thinks he’s the master. And I wanted to aim for something more in the middle. I wanted to delight in the language of thinking like a dog … But then in the end, I didn’t want it to be a story about humans from the perspective of the dog. I really wanted it to be a story about the relationship of this dog and this human.

Giorgis: How did you think about writing about guilt, especially in stories such as “We Men of Science,” which follows a man who transgresses in a series of small ways that ultimately prove disastrous?

Bob-Waksberg: Guilt? Well, I mean, I’m Jewish. [Laughs] As is the character in that story, actually. I think he’s the only explicitly Jewish character in the book, and he’s the most guilty.

Guilt is a funny thing. What I’ve been more surprised by in my recent adult life is when I don’t feel guilty. And I think there was a big lesson I learned, a transition between being in my 20s and being in my 30s. I always thought of myself as someone who attempted to be a decent person, who had flaws but good values and wanted to do good by others. And I really trusted my gut and that when I did things that were bad, I felt guilty. And, therefore, if I didn’t feel guilty about something, that meant it wasn’t bad. That was a logic puzzle that I created for myself, that got me into some trouble. And looking back, I am shocked at what I have been able to rationalize and justify for myself.

I think “We Men of Science” is a little bit about that. It’s about the guilt the character feels, but also the guilt he doesn’t feel, and how he convinces himself that what he’s doing is not wrong. Part of being an adult is learning that you can’t always trust your gut.

Giorgis: There’s a poem that came to mind a few times as I was reading the collection, by the Somali-British writer Warsan Shire, from her book Teaching My Mother How to Give Birth: “Two people who were once very close can without blame or grand betrayal become strangers. Perhaps this is the saddest thing in the world.”Bob-Waksberg: That’s usually what it is, right? I’m always weirded out when I see stories where everything’s going great and there’s a big fight and they break up. I’m like, Why would they break up? They were just having a fight! But if things have been bad for a while, and this is the slow unraveling—I think that’s more what it is. Well, I’m trying to think back to the breakups I’ve had. Some have felt like, “I thought things were going 100 percent great. And now you are dumping me, I don’t understand this at all!” But most times I felt like we both knew something wasn’t working.

Giorgis: How did you balance the sense of hope and despair throughout, even the title—
Bob-Waksberg: It’s funny because it’s a very long title. I started getting emails for “the Damaged Glory press tour” and I was like, “What if we call it the Someone Who Will Love You press tour? Let’s use the happy part instead!”

I’m kind of a sweet and salty kind of guy. That’s always been my writing—a little bit of both. But as I’ve gotten older, I have gotten less cynical. There was a long time where I was like, I’m gonna be single forever. Relationships are doomed to fail. Nobody can really know you … ‘We live alone in the house of the heart.’  That’s Brian Doyle [who famously considered the capacity of humans to love], another influence.

But now I feel known and I feel loved. So I would like to think that future books I write will be able to maintain a little bit of everything. I’ve allowed myself to change and write in ways that reflect how I feel about things now. Some of the stories in this book I could not write now, so I’m happy to have this record of them.

Giorgis: One of the things the stories do is really challenge the idea that love can fix a person or single-handedly diminish their sadness. Is that a trope you’ve been frustrated by in pop-culture depictions?

Bob-Waksberg: Yes, all of them. I understand why sometimes it’s nice to have a happy ending. I have some stories that are exactly that: They’re in love at the end and it’s fabulous, good for them. But I do think overwhelmingly we are told as a culture that that is the happy ending. I think we, as a culture, have internalized this idea that once you find the person that you’re supposed to be with, you will be happy. And then if you are not happy, it either means you’re doing something wrong or you did not find the person you’re supposed to be with. I think both those ideas are really dangerous.

I try to counter that a little bit in my work or suggest that, no, you cannot depend on a person to make you happy. A person can be a part of that and should be. If a person is making you unhappy, that is a bad situation. But I don’t want to suggest the problem is just that you need to find a better person.

Giorgis: How did you convey the sense of both risk and reward inherent in love and relationships as you wrote the stories?

Bob-Waksberg: The first big story in the collection is the one about the people getting married. That to me is such a happy story. It’s about this couple that clearly loves each other and works together and the power that this man feels for this woman even in spite of their challenges. It’s maybe more typically what you would expect out of a book of stories about love. And I wanted to put that in because I do want that feeling to exist in my book and not feel like, Oh, this is a book of people complaining about how hard love is.
Because I think when it works, it is wonderful. I think it’s a thing worth striving for—it’s why we put up with the rest of it, right?



“If you would seek my monument, look around you”—the words of Christopher Wren’s famous epitaph, laid into the floor of St. Paul’s Cathedral, in London, came to mind when a friend called with the news that Richard Todd, the longtime executive editor of The Atlantic, had died on April 21 after a fall. He was 78. Dick was the opposite of showy, flashy, or promotional. The idea of a grandiose self-assessment set into a marble rotunda, gazed upon by millions, would have elicited a gently amusing but unequivocal response. Wren’s epitaph came to mind for a different reason—because of the “look around you” part. As an editor and a man, Dick infused the works and lives of others around him to a rare degree.

Dick was an editor at The Atlantic throughout the 1970s and into the 1980s. Before and after, he was an editor at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, in later years with his own imprint. He taught writing at a number of colleges. His association with Tracy Kidder, whose book The Soul of a New Machine won the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction in 1982, is well known, but Dick worked closely with James Fallows, Suzannah Lessard, Ward Just, Adrian Nicole LeBlanc, Darcy Frey, Ann Patchett, Alan Lelchuk, Deborah Fallows, and many others.

The Atlantic during Dick’s time was lodged in a dignified townhouse—at 8 Arlington Street, in the Back Bay neighborhood of Boston. The editorial staff numbered about 35, mail arrived in stamped envelopes, and galley proofs were set in hot type and printed on long sheets of newsprint. The passage of time makes the arrangements seem Dickensian, but journalistically, the magazine was at the center of things. Dick’s office, on the second floor, was notable for a bay window, a marble fireplace, and a framed original poem by Emily Dickinson, written out in her distinctive hand. To someone of my generation, a dozen years stepped back from his, Dick was a legendary figure. We had both gone to Amherst College—where he had written his thesis on Dickinson—and I knew, as aspiring young editors and writers for 50 years have known, that Dick was one of those people who were ever willing to reach out a hand. When he came to The Atlantic in a senior role, in the late 1960s under Robert Manning, he was barely 30. He was well known as a writer but far better known as an editor. His handshake was soft but his hands were hard: While working at The Atlantic he also ran a farm in central Massachusetts and sold vegetables from a stand. To meet him for the first time was to encounter someone who seemed older than whatever his years happened to be, but somehow older in a way that seemed young. Tweeds and a knit tie represented the ceiling of his sartorial endeavor; khaki trousers and a light-blue denim shirt the swept-pine floor.

Watching editors at work is one of the more profitless activities one can undertake—it’s not like watching scrimshanders or surgeons or cooks. Several years ago, Dick and Tracy Kidder took turns exploring the editor-writer relationship in a superb book, Good Prose. It contains plenty of worthwhile advice: “Don’t concentrate on technique, which can be the same as concentrating on yourself. Give yourself to your story”; “try to attune yourself to the sound of your own writing. If you can’t imagine yourself saying something aloud, then you probably shouldn’t write it.” But the job of editing is often solitary. In the study of the colonial farmhouse in Ashfield, Massachusetts, where Dick and his wife, Susan, lived for decades, you would see manuscript pages in stacks of different heights arranged on a large table; only the presence of a pencil atop one of the stacks indicated that this was a work site. Visitors to Dick’s office at The Atlantic on occasion got more of a show: entering the room to find pages and notes laid out deliberately on the floor, Dick standing above them, observing and thinking. Coming upon such a scene was a reminder that there is a physicality to writing, as there is to working the soil, and that the word on the page activates all five senses, not just the sense of sight.

In autumn, the protruding lintels of old New England doorways are laden with welcoming displays of pine cones and pumpkins. Dick’s eyes and sheltering brow offered an open invitation in much this way. I was never sure why, but Dick’s own writing generally took a back seat to the writerly assistance he gave to others, whether as an editor or as a teacher. He was a keen social observer, and his manner and voice fit naturally with the demands of the personal essay. He was warm and he was funny. He had the capacity, as Chaucer did, to accept and enjoy the human condition for what it is, understanding that some things, such as the gene pool of Beacon Hill, could be admirable and laughable at the same time. His humor was educated but not highfalutin. It often derived from describing something exactly right—finding the combination of adjective and noun and adverb that precisely captured an act or attitude or outlook; that made you draw in your breath and smile and say to yourself: Yes, just so. Like his friend Richard Wilbur, he frequently took you by surprise in a quiet way that came to seem ordinary. Among my favorite essays of Dick’s is a short one he wrote for New England Monthly about swimming in the frigid summertime waters of Maine, to which he was partial. It ended like this, describing the moments after numbness has conquered and “all feeling beneath the ears subsides”:

After ten minutes or so people watching you swim in this water grow affectingly anxious, unable to comprehend that for you, suffering is only a memory. In the end, swimming in Maine proves not a physical but a mental experience. Freer than it ever is on land, the mind moves to new levels of abstraction. Like those distant islands that on a clear day seem to hover above the horizon, one’s thoughts float perfectly disembodied. When this condition becomes so pleasurable that you can hardly stand it, you might consider getting out: because you are about to die.

Dick did not publish a book of his own until he was almost 70—a book called The Thing Itself, about authenticity. It immediately became a classic. The authenticity he writes about comes in many forms. Objects and places, of course. But also the authenticity of community. The authenticity of oneself. The authenticity of love. There are brilliant passages in the book about mundane tasks such as cleaning out the barn, that “museum of false enthusiasms.” The Thing Itself manages to be a memoir without being an autobiography. Now that he is gone, it is the best way to know and experience Richard Todd.

I last saw Dick about two weeks before his death. My wife, Anna Marie, and I had been in the habit of stopping at Dick and Susan’s for lunch whenever we were heading to the Berkshires. It was early April, and the hill country around Ashfield was in that emergent state between winter and spring, which in New England can last for three months. Logs were burning in the kitchen fireplace. At one point, Susan suggested that we should read a poem, a poem dictated by the date: Richard Wilbur’s “April 5, 1974.” The poem begins, “The air was soft, the ground was cold,” and it perfectly caught the moment.

There is another bit of writing that caught the moment, and that captures Dick, and it is this, the last paragraph of The Thing Itself:

But I think within these sheltering walls I may sometimes understand another meaning of what it can be to “live in the moment.” Not that striving, self-forging, abyss-staring quest—not that at all, but instead something more like acceptance. It happens perhaps at a table at night with the closest people and you feel not unpleasantly that you are no more or less real than the candlelight. That they have your substance, your very self, in their hands. That it is their gaze and their laughter, their unspoken and inexplicable affection that give you substance, that you are held there like a fallen leaf on an invisible updraft of air.

Before we left, Dick had one piece of business on his mind. In the early 1980s, he explained, there had been a small fire at 8 Arlington Street, and he had packed up whatever was on the shelves and walls for safekeeping while the painters and plasterers repaired the damage. Not long after that, Dick began to work from his home in Ashfield, and the boxes came with him. In one of those boxes was the framed handwritten poem by Emily Dickinson. He wanted to make sure that it found its way back to The Atlantic. He remarked on the irony that the magazine had never published any of her poetry, though one of its editors had been her mentor. I wondered if he and Susan could come down to Washington in May, see the offices, and put the poem on the wall. The poem is one of Dickinson’s riddles, about the fact that “tomorrow” is never a place we step foot:

Tomorrow—whose location

the Wise deceives.

Though its hallucination

is last that leaves—

Fourteen tomorrows later, Dick was in the hospital. He would not see another. He took a call to reassure and be reassured on one point: The poem was coming back.



Last week, Jill Biden, the wife of the now–presidential contender Joe Biden, gave an interview to NPR. While she was there as an author—Biden recently published a memoir, Where the Light Enters—she was also there as a surrogate for her husband, and she answered questions about some of the controversies that have followed Joe in the early days of his latest primary run: the allegations of inappropriate touching; his treatment, when he was the chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee, of Anita Hill. As for the latter, Jill Biden said: “It’s time to move on.”

This is a familiar kind of pronouncement: Weary and wary, it attempts to curtail further discussion. It’s been litigated, Biden was suggesting of the way her husband treated Hill in 1991, even though it definitely has not. The rhetoric, in its attempt to impose a statute of limitations on a matter that doesn’t have one, is reminiscent of many of the reactions to Christine Blasey Ford’s accusations against Brett Kavanaugh (“This accusation is 36 years old,” Lindsey Graham put it, wearily, warily). It’s historical revisionism of an especially cynical strain: an attempt to rewrite the record not by offering a new version of events, but by insisting that the old versions are no longer worth our attention, because the old versions have become tedious. It’s time to move on is restless; it is also purposely forgetful.

The historian Richard Hofstadter talked about the paranoid style in American politics—the way the psychological logic of the conspiracy theory is woven into American habits of thought; the way an overarching attitude of “suspicious discontent” permeates our political discourse. These latest calls to willful amnesia, however, suggest an additional mode at play: the amnesiac style. The posture that takes an addled and messy world and concludes that the best way to make sense of it all—and the easiest way—is to focus on the present. Washed in the warm fog of forgetfulness, the amnesiac style surveys the past, with all its evils and errors, and insists that, for the good of us all, it’s time to move on.

As Joe Biden and his surrogates engaged in an apology tour that was notable mostly for its lack of true apologies, reports began circulating about another tour: Mark Halperin, the political pundit who lost his job two years ago after several of his colleagues came forward to accuse him of sexual harassment and abuse, has been making his comeback with the help of his network of friends in the media, and with the apparent aid of forgetfulness.

Here are some of the behaviors Halperin was accused of in 2017, by several of his former co-workers: propositioning women colleagues for sex. Grabbing one’s breasts against her will. Masturbating in front of another. Pressing his erect penis against another. Requiring one woman to sit on his lap—while his penis was erect—before he would give her the piece of information she needed to do her job. Calling co-workers late at night, with conversations that were sexual in nature and unwanted. One woman said that Halperin had violently attacked her, throwing her against a plate-glass window and pinning her arms to its surface. She also said that, after she rebuffed him, he threatened to ruin her career.

Halperin, CNN reported at the time, denied that he had “masturbated in front of anyone, that he physically assaulted anyone, or that he threatened anyone in the way described in this story.” And when the reports first emerged, he apologized, profusely, for the behavior he did admit to. “I am profoundly sorry for the pain and anguish I have caused by my past actions,” he said in a 2017 statement. (Halperin has not responded to The Atlantic’s request for comment.) He reiterated his regret in April, in the first interview he gave after the allegations were made public, on Michael Smerconish’s radio show: “I did things that were wrong and affected the lives of other people, and I need to earn my way back into being in a place where people are willing to listen to what I have to say, or hire me for a job, or let my son be part of their life.” But then Halperin shifted to cast-the-first-stone terms. “I wasn’t a perfect person when I made these mistakes,” he said. “I’m not a perfect person now. I’m happy to be judged by perfect people.”

In one way, this is PR 101—express regret, focus on the future, set the terms of the discussion to suggest that no one can be a fair critic—but the spin cycle here is cleansing much more than bad press. This is how forgetfulness sets in. (In the uncanny dystopia of 1984, “the past not only changed, but changed continuously.”) The sharp facts get dulled; the other characters get written away; and soon the story about Mark Halperin becomes generalized in the haze. He merely “did things that were wrong and affected the lives of other people.” And should we really be in the business of taking someone’s life from him just because he’s not a perfect person? Isn’t it time to move on?

“He seems genuinely sorry for what he did,” Smerconish said, defending his decision to host Halperin on his air. “My view is that to not let him opine after two years would be akin to a professional death sentence.”

Comebacks are certainly possible. Forgiveness is an act of grace. The allegations vary, and so must the responses to them. What has become clear, however, since the phrase #MeToo comeback became an open question and an anxious refrain, is the lack of a common vernacular that might lend precision to discussions of what redemption could look like for Halperin and so many others. The richness and nuance embedded in the discourse of restorative justice have not scaled to the mass media that direct the national conversation. Instead, for the most part, the professional returns have come through side doors and back channels, often without full restitution or, it would seem, true reckonings—corporations  and institutions deciding on behalf of everyone else what time, precisely, will be the time to move on.

The New York Times reporter Glenn Thrush, reassigned to cover HUD and HHS after a Times investigation concluded that he had “behaved in ways that we do not condone,” has quietly returned to covering electoral politics. NBC’s Brian Williams, suspended in 2015 not for a #MeToo-related offense but for telling an invented anecdote on the air, made a gradual comeback that, as Politico put it, “has been so understated and seamless, that it would have been easy not to notice.” The comeback culminated this week in Williams’s appearance at the NBCUniversal upfront programming presentation—which heralded, as Variety put it in a headline summarizing the event, “NBCU to Brian Williams: All Is Forgiven.”

Al Franken, who left the Senate in 2017 after being accused by several women of groping and unwanted kissing, recently tested the waters of a comeback via an essay he published in late April on his personal website. The essay said things about Special Counsel Robert Mueller and Attorney General William Barr; it also said, between its lines, It’s time to move on.

And now Mark Halperin is back, marketing punditry that will try—just as it did in the 2016 election—to shape the conversations that will in turn shape, among so much else, women’s futures. He has done work with a charity in Queens, he says; he has not, three of his accusers told The Washington Post recently, apologized to them personally. He has apparently simply forged ahead, confident that he’s done enough, and that his right to opine outweighs the other facts—and the other people—of the matter. So has Louis C.K., who has been playing small clubs as part of his own creeping comeback tour. (“An apology probably wouldn’t have satisfied his detractors on social media or the handful of protesters who set up in front of Acme [Comedy Company] for more than an hour Tuesday,” the Star-Tribune noted of a set C.K. performed last week in Minneapolis. “They didn’t get one.”) Over the summer, one comedy organizer explained the market logic of C.K.’s “redemption” like this: “At a club, the owners are going to want to put him up because there’s still money to be made with him and he’s still a name.”

The mechanics of the returns differ as greatly as the alleged misbehaviors do. But what they have in common, among other things, is an apparent faith in the shortness of the American attention span. They understand that the country’s personal capacity for forgetfulness can be, for them, a professional asset. The amnesiac style is there when Joe Biden, fresh off a discussion of the listening and learning he would do after women described how uncomfortable he had made them, proceeds to turn their stories into a joke: What better way to say it’s time to move on from something than to announce that you’re ready to laugh at it? The amnesiac style is there, as well, when the country, knowing exactly what it is getting, votes Donald Trump into office, effectively washing away the stories of the 19 women who have accused him of assault. It’s there when Trump’s administration hires Bill Shine, the Fox News executive who was ousted from the network for allegedly enabling a culture of sexual harassment there, as its communications director—a path of upward-failing so powerful that it ends its arc at the White House.

The amnesiac style is there, too, when Sean Spicer, made famous largely because of the angry lies he told at the very start of Trump’s presidency, gets a book deal that allows him to profit from all the mendacity. It’s there when Bill Clinton, credibly accused of rape, gives speeches to roaring, loving crowds. It’s there when Mel Gibson, after admitting to hitting his girlfriend and launching into a tirade against her full of racist and sexist epithets—and after drunkenly muttering to a police officer that “Jews are responsible for all the wars in the world”—returns to filmmaking to rousing acclaim. It’s there when Gibson, cleansed through fame’s alchemies, gets an Oscar nomination. It’s there when he is selected to feature in an upcoming film as a “rowdy Santa Claus.” It’s there when, as it was announced this week, he signs a deal to star in a satire of extreme wealth titled … Rothchild.

“We are permanently the United States of Amnesia,” Gore Vidal argued in his 2004 book, Imperial America. “We learn nothing because we remember nothing.” He was focused on geopolitics; he was talking about the past as a failed lesson; he was mourning all that is lost when a powerful nation proves itself singularly poor at doing the basic work of its own bookkeeping. But American amnesia is also decidedly mundane—the stuff of the politics that permeate people’s everyday lives. It is the result of daily concessions to inattention and distraction. Our particular form of forgetfulness can play out, all too often, in the present, lulling people to look away from the children in cages, from the abuses in the courts, from the systematized hatreds, from the planet that grows angrier by the day. Amnesia is a powerful force in part because it can be deeply preferable to the alternative: Remembering—recognizing—reckoning—is hard. It is so much easier to look around and give a shrug and conclude that, all things considered, it’s time to move on.



It’s inevitable that Rocketman will draw comparisons to Bohemian Rhapsody, last year’s smash-hit biopic in the form of a jukebox musical. Both are about hyper-popular rock acts who reigned supreme in the 1970s and ’80s; both are focused on effervescent showmen who spent many years in the closet, and both were—in a manner of speaking—directed by Dexter Fletcher. The direction of Bohemian Rhapsody was, of course, credited to Bryan Singer, but Fletcher was the man who completed that project after Singer was fired midway through filming. Rocketman gives us a chance to see what Fletcher can do when given complete control over a pop musical, and the results are hugely charming.

The music biographies of countless best-selling acts (Ray Charles, Johnny Cash, N.W.A.) tend to follow the same paint-by-numbers blueprint: a brief look at the artist’s childhood, a meeting with a skeptical record executive, a breakout moment on stage, a quick montage of glitz and glamour when record sales get huge, a descent into drug or alcohol abuse, and a triumphant comeback. Rocketman is no different. In tracing Elton John’s journey from his adolescence as a piano prodigy in suburban London to the heights of global fame, it touches on all the usual clichés of this cinematic subgenre. It just manages to do so in the most fizzy, fun fashion, powered by an energetic lead performance from Taron Egerton that goes beyond mimicry.

Unlike, say, Rami Malek in Bohemian Rhapsody or Jamie Foxx in Ray (two Oscar-winning performances), Egerton does all of his own singing as John. It’s a daunting challenge, but one that he rises to ably, aiming for the general spirit of John rather than trying to precisely replicate his mannerisms. Biographical actors often give off a limited and locked-in vibe because they’re trying to reproduce everything about their real-life subjects, down to facial tics and body language. Egerton, the star of the Kingsman spy franchise and last year’s unfortunate Robin Hood remake, understands that exuding charisma is much more important than getting lost in the details; the result is exciting, star-making stuff.

Fletcher, for his part, swerves decisively away from the Bohemian Rhapsody approach of staging concert scenes to resemble the famous events they’re drafted from. While that film ended with a painstaking recreation of Queen’s act at Live Aid—a simulation so exacting that it essentially syncs up with the original footage—Rocketman has no such pretensions. It’s instead presented as a full-blown, Broadway-ready musical, in which every needle drop breaks the fourth wall and sends the film sprinting into total fantasy mode.

Early on, a teenage Elton sits down at a local pub to sing “Saturday Night’s Alright for Fighting” (a song he didn’t actually write until his 20s); the customers quickly break into a choreographed dance number so barnstorming that it carries the performer through to adulthood. Later, when John stages his first concerts in America (a legendary series performed at L.A.’s Troubadour in 1970), he takes the stage to scattered applause and launches into “Crocodile Rock” with so much fervor that he starts to float in the air over his piano. Soon, the entire audience is levitating with him, until they all smash enthusiastically back onto the floor for the chorus. However silly, the moment captures the otherworldly quality that lies at the heart of any great pop song, but one that the directors of staid biographical projects so often refuse to indulge. Fletcher knows that John’s glitzy bravado was crucial to his success, so the director plays it up at every turn. Why shouldn’t he?

The supporting cast are required to play it broad, and some nail it better than others. Bryce Dallas Howard is ludicrous as John’s grumpy mother, Sheila, but Richard Madden evolves from coolly charming to frightening as John’s business manager, John Reid, with whom the singer had a tempestuous and eventually abusive relationship. Best of all the background figures is Jamie Bell as John’s rock-solid writing partner Bernie Taupin, who has written the lyrics to almost all of John’s songs (the pianist himself writes the music). Rocketman posits that Taupin lived the flip side of John’s life—plenty of fame and success, but largely out of the spotlight—and so Bell functions as an empathetic audience surrogate, looking on at John’s best and worst moments without judgment. The soulfulness of Bell’s performance and his chemistry with Egerton are strong enough to lend some emotional grounding to the high-energy movie.

The film’s framing device is a rehab support group where John (dressed as an orange devil) explains the impact of significant moments in his life, a storytelling approach that drags the most during Rocketman’s latter-half exploration of John’s struggle with addiction. Even so, Fletcher uses the songs effectively to essay John’s misery at the height of his fame, suggesting that the singer’s brash onstage persona existed mostly as a cover for his intense self-loathing and the misery of having to stay in the closet. Fletcher isn’t seeking to reinvent a very practiced storytelling formula; he’s just perfecting it. Rocketman is the most enjoyable pop biopic in years, an ideal match for its scintillating subject.



“I know it’s hard for you to understand even short sentences, I guess, but please don’t take my words out of context.”

It was June of 2018, and they were fighting again, the White House press secretary and the White House press. This time, Sarah Sanders was sparring with CNN’s Jim Acosta. This time, the subject at hand was the Trump administration’s newly implemented “zero tolerance” policy when it came to immigration—a policy that had led, in practice, to the separation of thousands of migrant families at the U.S.-Mexico border. Tempers flared that hot summer day in the White House’s hermetic press room, and the anger was broadcast, as it so often is, on cable news.

“The attorney general, earlier today, said that somehow there’s a justification for this in the Bible,” Acosta said to Sanders. “Where does it say in the Bible that it’s moral to take children away from their mothers?”

“I’m not aware of the attorney general’s comments or what he would be referencing,” Sanders replied. “I can’t—”

“Is it a moral policy, in your view?” Acosta asked.

“I can say that it is very biblical to enforce the law,” Sanders replied. “That is, actually, repeated a number of times throughout the Bible. However, this—”

“But where in the Bible does it say—” Acosta began.

“Hold on, Jim. If you’ll let me finish.”

“—it’s okay to take children away from their parents?”

“Again, I’m not going to comment on the attorney’s specific comments that I haven’t seen.”

“You just said it’s in the Bible to follow the law.”

“That’s not what I said.”

A degree of antagonism is an integral element of the White House press secretary’s role as currently configured; what Sanders brought to the public-facing aspect of the job, however, was an antagonism that was sharpened by the demands of political theater. Sanders, who announced her resignation today (the president hinted that she might next run for governor of her home state, Arkansas), had all but stopped giving televised press briefings by the end of her 23-month tenure. When she did provide briefings, however, she conducted those events as spectacles of partisanship and wearying demonstrations of gladiatorial ennui.

I know it’s hard for you to understand even short sentences, Sanders told the reporter, on that heated day last June, and it wasn’t an attack on his intelligence so much as an attack on the intelligence of the whole system he is part of. It was a comment that made the entire exercise—the exchange of information, the performance of democracy that is played out in the White House briefing room—seem silly and pointless and sad. And it was a comment that made the very, very big thing—in this case, the separation of migrant families, the relocation of children to cages—seem, for the viewers who watched the exchange, like something decidedly small.

The White House press secretary—the office, if not the person—is an outgrowth of the idea that, in a democracy, information matters, and facts matter, and while politicians and the press may tangle and tussle, they are ultimately on the same team. Sanders, who ascended to the press-secretary role in July of 2017, after the brief and peevish tenure of Sean Spicer, publicly rejected that idea. To watch a Sanders press conference, or to watch her representing the White House on cable news, was to be confronted with a vision of America that is guided by political Darwinism—an environment in which everything is a competition, with the winner determined by who can shout the loudest, who can distract the most effectively, who can get in the best insult before the time for questioning is over.

Here is some of the misinformation Sanders has spread on behalf of the White House: She has insisted that her boss never “promoted or encouraged violence,” although Donald Trump, among many other such promotions, said of a protester who’d been ejected from a 2016 rally, “I’d like to punch him in the face.” She has outright dismissed the stories of the multiple women who have accused Trump of sexual abuse as lies. She has told reporters that she’d heard from “countless” FBI agents who were happy that Trump had fired James Comey in 2017; she would later characterize that, to Robert Mueller, as a mere “slip of the tongue.”

Her broader legacy, though, is an acquiescence to the idea that facts themselves have a political bias. The agent of a president who has transformed “fake news” from an offhanded insult into a democratic anxiety, Sanders has used her powerful pulpit to promote the “Fake News Awards,” her boss’s carnivalesque attempt to institutionalize his mockery of the American media. She has accused reporters of “purposefully misleading the American people.” She has deflected; she has belittled; she has eye-rolled; she has condescended; she has obfuscated; she has misled; she has lied. And she has treated it all as a battle to be won. So many of the public interactions Sanders has conducted with reporters—whether Acosta or April Ryan or Jim Sciutto or Brian Karem or the many other members of the press who are charged with reporting on the daily doings of the White House—have been wars in miniature. And, day by day, the martial logic lurking in the way Americans talk about their politics—the campaign and the press corps, the war room—has been made ever more literal. What is true about the world we all navigate, together? That becomes a less important question than who is winning in it.

Sanders has stood behind the lectern of the White House briefing room, the ground zero of American democracy, doing what every press secretary will: articulating an idea of what the country is—and of what the administration that is guiding the nation most readily prioritizes and most wholeheartedly believes. Her tenure serves as a reminder of what happens when partisanship, aided by the power of the presidency, is allowed to subsume everything else: traditions, norms, truth, people’s lives. In 2018, at the Women Rule Summit with Politico, the reporter Eliana Johnson asked Sanders what she hoped her White House legacy would be, when the time came to have one. “I hope that it will be that I showed up every day and I did the very best job that I could to put forward the president’s message,” Sanders replied. By bringing into existence the particular cynicisms of the post-truth press conference, that is precisely what she did.



Joe Biden was never Saturday Night Live’s most compelling character, but for years, he was part of the show’s satirical firmament. As performed by Jason Sudeikis, he was a garrulous, high-energy grandpa, a sharp contrast to Fred Armisen’s and Jay Pharoah’s sedate portrayals of President Barack Obama. Sudeikis traded on Biden’s public image as an animated, gaffe-prone throwback fond of folksy words like malarkey. The actor’s performance is an even milder take on the former vice president than The Onion’s notorious depiction of him, which Brian Resnick described for National Journal as a “swashbuckling, ponytail-wearing dirty uncle” who was always causing trouble at the White House.

So as controversy continues to mount over Biden’s real-life reputation for inappropriately touching women on and off the campaign trail—behavior that’s been weakly defended by some as harmless flirtatiousness—it was somewhat fascinating to see Sudeikis return to SNL for a sketch that tried to reckon with Biden’s boisterous public persona. In Saturday’s opening sketch, the Biden campaign team (played by Kenan Thompson and Cecily Strong) assembled to tell their boss to address the “touchy-feely stuff” before he makes his 2020 run for the presidency official. But the eternally grinning Biden remained largely set in his ways.





“You guys know that I’m a tactile politician, right? I’m a hugger, I’m a kisser, and I’m a little bit of a sniffer,” Biden replied, after pulling Strong’s character into a big bear hug and touching Thompson’s character’s hair, and then going forehead-to-forehead with a consultant character played by Kate McKinnon. “One second, I’m just connecting, one second,” he explained. Cradling people’s faces, tickling palms, generally violating personal space—the sketch tried to capture Biden’s propensity for crossing boundaries and his own apparent cluelessness about the growing seriousness of the issue (as underlined by his equivocating nonapologies over it).

The premise of the sketch was intentionally undercut at the end when a potential Biden voter, played by Leslie Jones, was brought in, and she instantly recognized him as “Obama’s granddaddy” and wrapped him in a bear hug of her own. “I am so going to vote for you!” she cried, jokingly pawing at his body. “Did we learn anything today?” McKinnon’s character asked with a sigh. “Oh, yeah yeah yeah! I mean, not really, no, but the important thing I think is that I’m listening, I hear you, I feel you,” Biden replied, grabbing at her shoulders. “Let’s hug it out, America, whaddaya say? Biden and some woman in 2020!”

The sketch noted the irony of the debate about Biden, given that the current occupant of the White House has been accused of sexual harassment or assault by more than a dozen women and bragged about assault on tape. (The president has denied the allegations.) “Yes, but unlike his voters, your voters actually care,” Strong’s character said. That contrast poses a tricky challenge for SNL as it prepares for the gantlet of the 2020 election. Donald Trump continues to be almost impossible to parody at this point, given that his real-life persona is somehow more outsize and offensive than Alec Baldwin’s impression of him. Meanwhile, the show has found very little to satirize in the new Democratic candidates thus far, so it’s had to dip into celebrity guest appearances. (Expect Larry David to return soon as Bernie Sanders.)

Sudeikis’s return was partly a pleasant reminder of SNL’s coverage of the 2008 election, a comeback moment for the show that boosted its ratings and made stars of cast members such as Bill Hader, Kristen Wiig, Andy Samberg, and Sudeikis. But the cameo was also an example of the limits of that nostalgia as Biden prepares to run again. His aw-shucks persona and affable campaign presence were worth a familiar chuckle to Saturday Night Live, but this sketch couldn’t land a deeper blow, instead diagnosing his uncomfortable intimacy as the indulgence of an older man who’s out of step. If that’s the toughest political satire the show’s writers have to offer, then a miserable election cycle lies ahead for SNL.



In recent weeks, Saturday Night Live has been too preoccupied with the chaos surrounding the Mueller report and the controversy over Joe Biden’s touching to meaningfully tackle a story that’s ripe for satirizing: the college-admissions bribery scandal. The show’s two previous episodes mildly commented on an affair that has gripped public attention since mid-March, including Michael Che’s quip about the behavior of wealthy people during “Weekend Update,” and a sketch cut for time lambasting admissions panels for chasing potential students’ fame. But beyond those instances, the scandal has been largely been neglected.

Saturday’s cold open sought to remedy that failure. Unfortunately, the sketch, which was set in a jail cell, quickly lost sight of its punch line and purpose by broadening its initial focus on the actress Lori Loughlin (played by Kate McKinnon) to include other newly indicted figures: the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange (Michael Keaton) and the lawyer Michael Avenatti (Pete Davidson).





McKinnon played Loughlin as a hardened criminal whose alleged actions shocked her three cell mates, who were in custody for armed robbery, assault, and murder. “I paid $500 grand to a woman’s crew coach to say my daughter was good at rowing,” she said menacingly. When the prisoners, played by Chris Redd, Kenan Thompson, and Kyle Mooney, balked at the number (“Hold up! You paid $500 grand for USC?” Thompson asked in disbelief), she coolly replied that the amount was only what she paid to get her daughter in. She dropped an additional $300,000 for tuition. “And you know what her job is now?” she asked. “She’s an influencer on Instagram.”  

McKinnon performed in most of the episode’s sketches, delivering sharp-toothed impressions including Joy Behar and the Queen of England, but her Loughlin fell flat. Dressed in a brown suit similar to the one Loughlin wore to her court appearance, McKinnon could do no more than look the part. But her trouble characterizing Loughlin perhaps spoke more to the actress’s nondescript persona. After all, how do you intriguingly impersonate a woman mostly known for her anodyne TV roles, like lovable Aunt Becky on Full House and her more recent part as the bland but firm Abigail Stanton on Hallmark’s frontier series, When Calls the Heart?

McKinnon’s version strained to frame those roles as an explanation for Loughlin’s alleged participation in the cockamamie cheating scheme. Upon being told that she wouldn’t last long in prison, Loughlin laughed and pointed to her career with the Hallmark channel. “I have seen hell, man,” she said. “And in half those Hallmark movies, I marry Santa’s son. I have lost all sense of reality.”

Had the cold open drawn to a close after that bit, the scene would’ve been one of the weaker but still pointed moments of a disjointed episode. (Much of the audience was eagerly waiting for the globally beloved South Korean boy band BTS to make its SNL debut as the musical guest; repeated references to the group throughout the episode’s mostly insipid sketches drew the wildest cheers of the night.) But then SNL also brought out Assange and Avenatti, squeezing more characters into a premise that hinged on a setting rather than an actual point. SNL’s writers never managed to deepen the sketch’s superficial commentary about contemporary criminality, and the distinctions between financial, cyber-, and violent offenses.

To the show’s credit, the cold open did use its cast members to full effect instead of relying so heavily on outside talent. Keaton’s smaller guest appearance marked a welcome shift away from Alec Baldwin’s Donald Trump and Robert De Niro’s Mueller, both of which have been SNL regulars of late. But Keaton, too, struggled to depict Assange in a way that didn’t equivocate his alleged crimes. Battling Davidson’s Avenatti and McKinnon’s Loughlin for the title of craziest new prisoner, he said, “Yeah, you cheat your schools and you rob your companies; that’s cute. It is. I’ve attacked the U.S. military, bitches, because I’m an actual James Bond super villain, and I’m one step away from destroying the goddamn moon.” That bloviating speech—along with the show’s fixation on the rumors that Assange wiped his fecal matter on the Ecuadorian embassy’s walls—won the half-hearted power struggle. In a confusing twist, though, the sketch ended by cutting to the incarcerated rapper Tekashi 6ix9ine (played by Melissa Villaseñor) for no apparent reason other than to use him as an ambiguous foil for the other celebrity prisoners.

The news cycle of late seems to turn over rocks that reveal not just bad but utterly ludicrous behavior. In trying to cram the latest headlines into a single sketch that boiled down to “famous people accused of doing bad things,” SNL wasted the punch-line gold it had been handed.



In a 1975 essay titled “American SF and the Other,” the great science-fiction writer Ursula K. Le Guin took her genre to task. Science fiction, she began, centers on “the question of The Other—the being who is different from yourself. This being can be different from you in its sex; or in its annual income; or in its way of speaking and dressing and doing things; or in the color of its skin, or the number of its legs and heads.” In American science fiction, she noted, human aliens—women, people of color, the poor—mostly got sidelined or subjugated by space aliens, who, in turn, mostly got murdered or had their planets colonized. Enough, Le Guin wrote. Time to make the genre truly face the future. In order to do that, writers needed to take an anti-racist, anti-sexist, and anti-colonial approach to their work. They had to consider “such deeply radical, futuristic concepts as Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.”

Two recent literary science-fiction novels, Pola Oloixarac’s Dark Constellations and Namwali Serpell’s The Old Drift, add the increasingly radical concept of privacy to Le Guin’s list. Oloixarac is Argentine and Serpell is Zambian, and both set their novel in their country of origin, creating post-colonial futures in which surveillance poses disturbing new threats. Their stylistic approaches are disparate—Dark Constellations is a slim allegory written with a chat forum’s acrid wit, while The Old Drift is a sprawling epic that unfolds with the wild detail of a Hieronymus Bosch painting—but the novels share a provocative core idea: that colonialism was a massive invasion of privacy, and that technology is on track to rival it.

Oloixarac is more oblique about this idea than Serpell. Her novel’s main arc follows a hacker named Cassio as he joins Stromatoliton, a DNA-surveillance company working with the fictional LatAm Genetic Data Unification Project—a program with brutal roots in the Cold War–era repression of dissidents—to let governments track citizens’ every movement. While the company’s sinister agenda is fairly clear, Oloixarac doesn’t provide a singular villain: Cassio’s intentions toward Stromatoliton become destructive thanks to his hunger for power.

Oloixarac parallels the Stromatoliton story line with that of an 18th-century explorer who experiments on human bodies. Niklas Bruun collects samples of a hallucinogenic plant from the Amazon, then grows them inside women’s wombs. In Europe, he becomes a celebrity, thanks to his conquest of jungles and women. As soon as Bruun returns from his first trip, his stories become fodder for the tabloid press, which uses his botanical sketches as “candid proof that the cream of scientific aristocracy was embroiled in a strange coital affair.” He becomes a representation of the hypermasculine colonial impulses to penetrate, to collect, and to dominate.

This makes Bruun a double for the young Cassio, whose aggressions against Stromatoliton are meant not to protest a loss of privacy, but to demonstrate his potency. Oloixarac links this desire to Cassio’s relentlessly sexualizing attitudes toward women. To Cassio, women are an “incomprehensibly sadistic” alien race, deserving of scorn and abuse. In her 1975 essay, LeGuin asked, “Isn’t the ‘subjection of women’ in [science fiction] merely a symptom of a whole which is authoritarian, power-worshiping, and intensely parochial?” Oloixarac’s response, as conveyed through her blunt-force portrayal of Cassio’s misogyny, is a resounding Yes.

Cassio’s lust for power undermines any hopeful currents that Dark Constellations could have had. Oloixarac portrays humans as a grabby, greedy species struggling to control as much of others as possible. This is as true of Bruun and Stromatoliton as it is of Cassio, scheming in his bedroom, “mocking corporate armies, spitting on the sense of security felt by those who believed themselves to hold power—subjecting them, in sum, to a new reality principle wherein beings like Cassio reigned.” Rather than writing Cassio as a concerned hacktivist, Oloixarac makes him a curdled little dictator whose ultimate interest is dominance.

The only character in Dark Constellations not interested in controlling others is Piera, a disaffected Stromatoliton biologist whose alienation from her male co-workers and from the overreach of her company leads her to cut herself off—from people, and from broader systems. She privately refers to her employer as “the animal of the state unleashed,” but remains at Stromatoliton, satisfying her voyeuristic curiosity even as the future of Argentine privacy is in question. With Piera, Oloixarac seems to underscore the impossibility of stepping away from power in a world in which science overrides ethics. Piera may consider herself an observer rather than a participant, but she remains complicit in the global expansion of surveillance.

Judging from her novel, Namwali Serpell might disagree with Oloixarac’s pessimistic outlook. The Old Drift is a massive, complicated work with a straightforward Hegelian opposition at its heart: Colonialism and anti-colonialism collide, and the resulting clash transforms Serpell’s fictional Zambia. The novel opens at the turn of the 20th century, as a British colonist named Percy Clark observes the construction of a bridge near Victoria Falls in what was then called Southern Rhodesia. At the end, a multiracial trio of Zambian revolutionaries destroys the nearby Lake Kariba dam. The function of colonialism, the novel suggests, is to contain power; the function of anti-colonialism is to unleash it.

The Old Drift begins with Clark and his British comrades living “as brave pioneers” by Victoria Falls. Serpell moves through Zambian independence and hopeful 1970s socialism into a near future in which an authoritarian government has allowed a fictive Sino-American consortium near-unlimited access to the country. The consortium buys Zambia’s power sources, including the Lake Kariba dam, then starts medical testing on unsuspecting Zambians.

The three protagonists of The Old Drift’s final section are all complicit, to varying degrees. Naila works for a government office that installs free, compulsory, Wi-Fi–bearing beads in Zambians’ hands. The government uses the beads to monitor citizens and, at one point, to test an experimental HIV vaccine on them without their consent—a vaccine that Naila’s boyfriend, Joseph, helped research, delivered via drones that their friend Jacob invented.

The consortium stole Joseph’s research, but Jacob sold his willingly—more or less. For Jacob, who grew up in a settlement and learned to read as a teenager, the ability to build drones is financially freeing, proof that “technology is no longer the preserve of the rich.” Naila, though, understands that the consortium is using her friends’ inventions to exploit Zambians. The consortium does not know whether its vaccine works; its nonconsensual beta testing could lead to a new wave of infections. The fundamental disrespect for Zambian lives mirrors the disrespect at the heart of British colonialism.

Naila convinces Jacob and Joseph that the consortium’s power in Zambia amounts to a 21st-century version of the scramble for Africa, the European colonial powers’ rush to claim African land. But the consortium isn’t just procuring Zambian water and land; it’s also violating bodily privacy with its experiments. As in Dark Constellations, state power and personal autonomy are in conflict. But in The Old Drift, Naila, Jacob, and Joseph band together to resist.

In her essay, Le Guin asked science-fiction writers to stop “daydreaming about a return to the Age of Queen Victoria, and [start] thinking about the future. I would like to see … a little human idealism.” Serpell opens her novel at the end of Victoria’s reign and closes it with an explosion of idealism—and water from Victoria Falls. Naila is a heroine Le Guin would have likely loved to see: She’s young, female, Zambian of Indian descent, and militant in the face of global oppression. Jacob and Joseph may be the inventors, but Naila’s the one with a vision for the future of formerly colonized nations.

In this way, The Old Drift enters territory that Dark Constellations leaves untouched. Both writers’ works highlight how easily surveillance can masquerade as progress, and expose the subtle ways colonialism persists in contemporary political life. To do this, Serpell emphasizes global financial disparities, while Oloixarac focuses on the intellectual through line from colonization to technological domination. In Dark Constellations, though, that domination is impossible to fight. In The Old Drift, it’s not only possible, but also a necessary moral choice. Perhaps this makes Oloixarac, with her spot-on depiction of tech-industry misogyny, a more realistic writer, but there’s far more of Le Guin’s idealism to be found in Serpell’s future, which, by the novel’s end, looks newly and radically free.



In the June issue, The Atlantic published an essay exploring the possibility that an Elizabethan writer named Emilia Bassano might have had a hand, or more, in the creation of William Shakespeare’s work. Elizabeth Winkler’s authorship quest was speculative in nature; her goal was to highlight rich new perspectives on the plays and the female voices within them.

The piece sparked great interest in Bassano’s life and curiosity about women’s literary contributions in Shakespeare’s era, the challenges facing Shakespeare biographers, and feminist themes in the work. It also generated dissent, most notably the argument that the piece did not pay sufficient attention to the scholarly consensus that any case for anyone other than Shakespeare is conjectural. Winkler’s response to the initial reception of the article can be found here.

In the interest of broadening this discussion, we’ve asked five distinguished commentators to address the article and related issues.

Our five commentators are:



Editor's Note: This article is one in a series of responses to Elizabeth Winkler’s article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?,” in the June issue of the magazine.

I don’t believe that Emilia Bassano wrote the plays of Shakespeare. I don’t think Elizabeth Winkler does either. Emilia Bassano is, however, a very interesting, too-little-considered person, robustly present in the cultural world of Shakespeare’s England and intimately tied to the court. So for that reminder alone, Winkler’s recent essay, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?” is of value.

Could Bassano have known Shakespeare? Certainly. Indeed, she has been proposed as the “dark lady” of Shakespeare sonnets, but that remains unproved, though not impossible. “Not impossible,” however, is a low bar. Could she have written the plays of Shakespeare? Winkler is curious, and she points to knowledge and experiences that Bassano had but that could seem unlikely for Shakespeare, and flirts with the idea that Shakespeare functioned as Bassano’s beard. That seems to me to be awfully close to impossible. But could Bassano have collaborated in some way with Shakespeare? I don’t think it is true, but why not?

To paraphrase the title of one of the many responses Winkler’s article elicited, Shakespeare wasn’t a Jewish woman and he was a genius. But the idea that no one else had a hand, or a voice, in any of his plays has to be wrong. Plays are by their very nature collaborative, dependent not merely on a playwright’s talent but on the abilities of various theater artists and technicians to put the play onstage. Authorship is only one, though admittedly the main one, of the conditions of play-making.

In the absence of any authorial manuscripts of a complete play, we know Shakespeare’s plays only in textual forms that preserve others’ agency: actors’ interpolations and cuts, scribal misreadings or guesses, typographical errors or inventions—some of which necessarily have become part of what we think of as “Shakespeare.” And more substantive modes of collaboration are evident in his plays. The Two Noble Kinsmen says on its title page that it was written by John Fletcher and William Shakespeare, a contemporary claim no one has seriously doubted. But even without such a clear attribution, the same could be said about Henry VIII; no one with an ear can fail to hear two discrete voices in the text, one Shakespeare’s and the other, almost certainly, Fletcher’s.

Of course, these are late and relatively minor plays, so perhaps little is at stake in this observation. Still, the one dramatic document that is often said to be in Shakespeare’s own handwriting—the text of a play called Sir Thomas More that was begun in the early 1590s—exists in a manuscript with six distinct hands. One hundred forty-seven lines of this manuscript, by the so-called “Hand D,” have often been claimed to be Shakespeare’s, which, if it is true, would show that Shakespeare also collaborated with other playwrights earlier in his career.  What’s more, recent scholars have argued that the three parts of Henry VI, as well as Titus Andronicus, show the then-young Shakespeare working with more experienced playwrights such as Thomas Kyd, George Peele, and even Christopher Marlowe—an exact contemporary whose plays written before his untimely death seem undeniably better than anything Shakespeare had written at that time.

So, early and late in his career, Shakespeare worked with other playwrights. In the middle, other playwrights seem to have worked with him, or at least worked on his scripts. The playwright Thomas Middleton had a hand in Macbeth, probably in Timon of Athens, and likely in both Measure for Measure and All’s Well That Ends Well.

No doubt there are other collaborations in the Shakespeare canon. That’s the way plays were composed. The plays of the Elizabethan theater were not written like Lord Byron’s poems or Virginia Woolf’s novels in a room of his or her own. They were more like our movie or TV scripts, which might combine several ideas from a writers’ room or get reworked by one or more “script doctors.” In the account book of the theater manager Philip Henslowe—the most important surviving document testifying to how plays were written in Shakespeare’s time—nearly two-thirds of the plays mentioned are in some sense collaborative. A team of playwrights might have completed a script by writing one act each, as was the case for a play Henslowe commissioned in 1602 from Anthony Munday, Michael Drayton, John Webster, Thomas Dekker, and Middleton. And old plays were regularly updated, as when Henslowe paid two playwrights, Samuel Bird and William Rowley, for “additions” to Marlowe’s Doctor Faustus.

Readers happily call the astounding body of plays that the world reveres not just Shakespeare’s, but actually Shakespeare. That should not, however, keep us from thinking about Shakespeare’s collaborators. He was a pro, working in the professional conditions of the theater that he has come to represent. Was Emilia Bassano among those who worked with him? I doubt it. But—although this, as I have said, is setting a very low bar—it is not impossible.



Editor's Note: This article is one in a series of responses to Elizabeth Winkler’s article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?,” in the June issue of the magazine.

For years, fantasists who peddle the fiction that Shakespeare didn’t write the plays attributed to him have failed to get Wikipedia to backdate doubts about his authorship. Wikipedia refuses to do so because scholars have demonstrated that two and a half centuries passed before this theory was first proposed, in the mid–19th century. That’s a fact. You can imagine the doubters’ joy when discovering that Elizabeth Winkler managed to publish this falsehood in the pages of The Atlantic, confidently assuring her readers that “doubts about whether William Shakespeare … really wrote the works attributed to him are almost as old as the writing itself.”*

With that claim, we have entered into an alternate universe, inhabited by conspiracy theorists. They have their work cut out for them, given the body of evidence confirming that Shakespeare wrote his plays. In promoting this conspiracy theory, Winkler recycles the stale and feeble arguments all too familiar to anyone who has dealt with this fringe movement: Hey, a lot of famous people have doubted Shakespeare’s authorship, so you should too! He was an actor and a moneylender, a profile that doesn’t match what we like to think a real writer should be!

It turns out that it’s possible to lend money and act and still write great plays. And, in fact, only an actor-playwright in the heat of composition, one who knew who would be cast in an unfinished play, might carelessly write in his “speech headings” the names of his fellow actors—Will Kemp, John Sinklo, Richard Cowley—rather than the names of the characters they were to play. Traces of this habit survive in early printed versions of Shakespeare’s plays, making it hard to imagine how anyone but a male actor-playwright—no women acted in the public theater—could have written them. Perhaps Winkler can explain away as well why in 1623 his fellow actors chose to preface Shakespeare’s plays with glowing tributes for his words from fellow authors, along with his portrait. Good luck with that.

In proposing that a woman may have been the true author of Shakespeare’s plays, Winkler seems to imply that Elizabethan women weren’t allowed to write and publish plays under their own names, so they had to do so surreptitiously (which I assume accounts for what she never otherwise explains: why a woman felt it necessary to borrow the actor Shakespeare’s name instead of using her own or making one up). Many of us who teach Elizabethan drama regularly assign The Tragedy of Mariam (1613),“written,” its title page proudly declares, “by that learned, virtuous, and truly noble lady, E.C.”—Elizabeth Cary. The Tragedy of Mariam makes clear that there was no stigma attached to a woman writing or publishing a play.

Much of Winkler’s article explores the possibility that the plays were written by the Elizabethan author Emilia Bassano. I was more than a little surprised to get an email from Winkler (after she learned that The Atlantic had commissioned me to write a response), denying that she had ever claimed that Bassano wrote the plays. Her critics, she wrote, have “missed the larger point of my piece, which isn’t to assert that Bassano wrote Shakespeare. In fact, I never claim she did.” Well, she had me fooled. And apparently The Atlantic too, which described her argument as “The Case for Emilia Bassano.” Winkler could have saved everyone a lot of trouble if she had said so explicitly in the piece.

I once found conspiracy theories like this mildly amusing. I no longer do. Living in an era in which such theories have proliferated with awful consequences (from “Obama is a Muslim” to the spurious claims of anti-vaxxers), encountering a talented young journalist for The Wall Street Journal promoting one in the pages of The Atlantic is deeply disheartening. As Oliver Kamm of the London Times noted in his response to Winkler’s article in Quillette, journalists—writing at a time when the press is being falsely smeared by President Donald Trump for disseminating “fake news”—have a special obligation to steer clear of promoting conspiracy theories.

All this is a shame, because the Twitter-storm kicked up by her essay obscures a powerful insight at the heart of it, one that motivated Winkler’s account in the first place: a sea change in how we understand Shakespeare’s depiction of women, especially “all the remarkable female friendships.” But it doesn’t follow that because Shakespeare wrote insightfully about women he was one, any more than it does that because Shakespeare saw so penetratingly into the minds of homicides like Macbeth and Claudius he was a murderer, too.

So I hope that Winkler abandons her authorship fantasies and focuses her attention instead on those heroines whose words resonate powerfully for her, because she is clearly onto something important in drawing our renewed attention to “Beatrice and Hero’s allegiance” in Much Ado About Nothing and “Emilia’s devotion to her mistress” in Othello. Driven by a half century of feminist scholarship and further propelled by the #MeToo movement, her essay helps us see the depth of female friendship and of women’s refusal to kowtow to men in Shakespeare’s plays. What Winkler argues for here is also shaping how the next generation of playgoers is experiencing these works.

I’ve seen these changes up close in my role as “Shakespeare scholar in residence” at the Public Theater, in New York, where I get to observe rehearsals in which directors and actors are breaking through encrusted traditions, foregrounding a dynamic in the plays that has been downplayed for too long. This was brought home powerfully for me last summer, watching Heather Lind and Alison Wright in Ruben Santiago-Hudson’s production of Othello at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. The heartbreaking intimacy of Lind’s Desdemona and Wright’s Emilia—which transcended their differences in class, privilege, and wealth—put the relationship of these doomed women at the center of the tragedy.

I thought that might have been a one-off, but the three Public Theater productions I have worked on since then have all put female friendships front and center. Jenny Koons made the bond between Carolyn Kettig’s Hermia and Rosanny Zayas’s Helena a key feature of her Midsummer Night’s Dream. Laurie Woolery went even further in The Tempest, turning the central friendship in the play into one between women, regendering the roles and casting Myra Lucretia Taylor as Prospero and Nancy Rodriguez as Gonzalo.

And for the past month I have watched as the extraordinary solidarity of Danielle Brooks’s Beatrice and Margaret Odette’s Hero has gotten deeper and deeper in rehearsals of Kenny Leon’s production of Much Ado, moving the familiar play in a powerful new direction; audiences will understand in fresh ways why Beatrice weeps for Hero and demands that Benedick kill Claudio for humiliating her cousin. By late May that show will be in previews at the Delacorte, and I’m happy to invite Elizabeth Winkler to see it.

* We have corrected the relevant sentences in Elizabeth Winkler’s piece to state that theories positing others as the true author of the work attributed to Shakespeare emerged in the mid-19th century.



Many a superhero origin story—and heaven knows that cinemas have been flooded with them in the past decade—has an extended early sequence in which the protagonist gets to fool around with his or her newly acquired powers. Think of Spider-Man before he learns that with great power comes great responsibility, when he’s using his wall-crawling abilities to win wrestling matches and swing around the city with impunity. Shazam!, the loudly titled new comic-book adventure from David F. Sandberg, is a feature-length adaptation of that freewheeling phase: Young Billy Batson (played by Asher Angel) is given great power, and with it, he has a lot of fun.

Shazam! is based on a 1940s Whiz Comics title, which centers on a caped, many-muscled hero called Captain Marvel (no, not that one) who dresses in red and flies like a speeding bullet. Subsumed into the world of DC Comics in the 1970s after a long lawsuit over the Whiz hero’s similarity to DC’s Superman, this odd also-ran can’t even use his original name now that it’s been claimed by the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Still, Sandberg and the screenwriter Henry Gayden lean into the quirkiness of the property they’re adapting and let it dominate the story, making a fairly typical tale of derring-do feel somehow intimate, character-driven, and inventively funny.

Given the glut of spandex-wearing champions being churned out every month, theatergoers would be well within their rights to claim superhero fatigue and skip Shazam! But the film is hyperaware of the many storytelling tropes it can remix, razz, or flat-out ignore, precisely because audiences are so used to them. While Shazam! is technically part of the extended DC Comics Universe that produced duds such as Batman v Superman and Justice League (as well as the far more winning Wonder Woman and Aquaman), those films belong to a different, self-serious endeavor, with heroes who stand for truth and honor, and pitiless villains who need to be driven back into other dimensions.

In Shazam!, our hero, Billy, is a teenage boy whose biggest demons are internal; he was abandoned as a child and has a strong rebellious streak as a result. After one of his frequent attempts to run away in search of his mother, Billy is placed in a new foster home, run by the kindly Victor (Cooper Andrews) and Rosa Vasquez (Marta Milans), where he rooms with a wisecracking paraplegic boy named Freddy Freeman (Jack Dylan Grazer). After an act of kindness—defending Freddy from school bullies—Billy is chosen by a decrepit old wizard (Djimon Hounsou) to gain the magic powers of Shazam. What magic powers are those? Well, super strength, for sure, along with invulnerability; lightning bolts; flight (though Billy isn’t too good at that); and, most important, the ability to turn into a grown man (Zachary Levi) anytime he yells—all together now—the word Shazam!

What follows is a large-hearted cross between Big and Man of Steel that spends most of its running time reveling in the juvenile joy that any teenager who could turn into an unkillable Übermensch would feel. As Shazam, Levi possesses the same kind of ridiculously proportioned body that his costumed contemporaries do, but he’s also a skilled comic actor who can sell Billy’s utter lack of readiness to become a broad-shouldered adult who might have to save the world. Instead, Billy and Freddy buy beer, make YouTube mashups of Shazam’s super strength, and use his lightning powers to rapidly charge the phones of random passersby. Today’s bleak society might be in need of idealistic role models, but Shazam! celebrates the very human selfishness that comes with Billy’s cosmic windfall.

If it were just a loosey-goosey genre spoof, Shazam! would be a successful but forgettable confection. But the film seamlessly shifts into a more emotional gear as it barrels toward its final act, where some life lessons must be learned and a glowing-eyed villain (Mark Strong) has to be confronted. It ends on a twist that surprised me in the best way, opening up Billy’s heroic arc in intriguing directions and getting me choked up out of nowhere. This is the rare comic-book movie that actually seems geared toward families, mixing adolescent humor with sincere sweetness that doesn’t cloy.

Many a 21st-century project, be it Netflix’s Stranger Things or J. J. Abrams’s Super 8, is indebted to the 1980s output of Steven Spielberg and his company Amblin Entertainment, which made classics such as Gremlins and Back to the Future. Fun kids’ fare, in other words, with just the right amount of edge. But those imitations often trend too dark. Shazam! has none of the slavish ’80s references or obvious needle drops, but in tone and style, it’s right out of the Spielberg playbook of rollicking genre adventures that don’t have to line up with carefully plotted franchises. Shazam! is a throwback in all the right ways: a superhero tale for a simpler blockbuster era, one that is well worthy of viewers’ nostalgia.



Luke Skywalker is dead. Rey’s parents are “nobody.” Yet Star Wars: Episode IX will be subtitled The Rise of Skywalker. What Skywalker is rising? From where to where? The name is a provocation—one very much in line with the director J. J. Abrams’s love of teasing audiences like a magician. He promises huge, reality-shifting twists. Behind the curtain often lies something familiar.

The teaser that debuted at Friday’s Star Wars Celebration in Chicago is even less informative than previous teasers for Disney’s revamped saga, which is saying something. It opens with Rey, the Force-filled hero, panting and squinting in that most essential of Star Wars biomes: a desert. “We’ve passed on all we know,” Luke Skywalker, or his ghost, says in voice-over. “A thousand generations live in you now. But this is your fight.” Out of the distance comes a souped-up TIE fighter. As Rey hurls herself over it, lightsaber in hand, The Matrix’s bullet time appears to come to the Galaxy Far, Far Away. It’s a statement piece of an opening—a reassertion that Star Wars is, first, a nifty, visceral hybrid of Westerns, sci-fi, kung-fu flicks, and myth.

From there, it’s all quick shots teeing up YouTube analysis videos that will be many times the length of the teaser. Identifiably new elements appear sparse, and each one is a callback in a way. BB-8 has a minimalist droid friend, Dio, that looks both like a glue-gun nozzle and like a duck (it’s cute!). Lando Calrissian (played again by Billy Dee Williams, last seen in a Star Wars in 1983) pilots the Millennium Falcon. There’s a city in misty, rainy mountains (there’s always a new city in a new climate). There’s a desert chase involving speeder bikes or podracing or both. Rey and her crew look out over crashing waves to what appears to be the detritus of a Death Star.

To close comes the big twist: a cackle against a black screen. It’s presumably the voice of Emperor Palpatine, the grand villain Darth Vader threw down an exhaust shaft at the end of Return of the Jedi, the original trilogy’s closer. To confirm a Palpatine resurrection, Ian McDiarmid, the actor who played the emperor, appeared onstage at the Star Wars Celebration after the teaser’s premiere. Given that the big bad Snoke was severed to bits in Episode VIII—The Last Jedi, it seems fair to assume that Palpatine has been a phantom menace throughout the recent films, and that he’ll emerge more fully for the finale.

The 2010s Star Wars were never likely to escape the shadow of the original trilogy, but Palpatine’s cameo hints that Abrams might double down on the same nostalgia-drunk approach that marked 2015’s The Force Awakens, for better and for worse. Rian Johnson’s The Last Jedi then daringly scrambled, ditched, and defamed cherished ingredients of the Star Wars formula—with resulting acclaim and profits, but also rabid backlash among some fans. When Abrams was called on to replace the fired Colin Trevorrow as the director of Episode IX, it raised the likelihood of a deep sensibility clash across the three movies. Whereas Johnson is a radical, Abrams is a restorer. Would the latter hit undo on the former’s refreshing but controversial changes?

The new teaser certainly seems to want to project that the answer is yes. Among the most intriguing reveals of The Last Jedi was that Rey is the daughter of unremarkable junk traders, rather than descended from the Skywalkers. If true—the source here was the untrustworthy Kylo Ren—the very nature of the Star Wars saga would expand from being about hereditary greatness (a beloved fiction trope with nasty social implications) to being about how excellence can be born anywhere. The title The Rise of Skywalker raises the possibility that Rey’s a Luke relative after all, and that we’ve really just been watching a retelling of his story. Also notable is that the trailer shows Kylo Ren welding his helmet back together. Pointedly, The Last Jedi saw his mask—a symbol of Kylo’s and The Force Awakens’s fannish fealty to Darth Vader—destroyed.

Yet almost paradoxically, that this is a J. J. Abrams affair means that the trailer’s hints of recycling and rehashing could be feints. Taking the director’s publicity materials at face value is always foolish, as this is the man who pioneered the 21st-century Hollywood business of amping the audience via misdirection. The Rise of Skywalker title thus could refer to Kylo Ren, who might turn good and reclaim the legacy of his uncle Luke. It could refer to something about Leia (Carrie Fisher died before Episode IX was filmed, and Abrams built scenes around unaired footage of her past performances, rather than digitally re-creating her). It could refer to some greater curveball. A baby with the first name Skywalker? The galaxy’s latest dance craze? Or, per my colleague Adam Serwer’s ever less wild-seeming theory: Is Rey a clone of Anakin Skywalker?

The answers to these questions aren’t just of significance to the plot—they’re significant in an era of Hollywood reboots and sequels that only sometimes seem to bring novel ideas to the screen. Star Wars has always been rooted in the notion that greatness lies at the blending of a recognizable past with a creative vision of the future. It’s no surprise that the most heated debates around the series boil down to the question of which is more important: preserving or pioneering? Abrams’s final argument on that matter, and how it’s received, could echo through the generations as much as the Skywalker story.



“One of the extraordinary adaptive powers of our species,” Karen Russell writes in her new collection of stories, “is its ability to transmute a stray encounter into a first chapter.” A stray encounter, she describes, could involve the meeting of a 22-year-old man and a 26-year-old woman in a Pennsylvania bar and, soon after, the sudden decision to quit their jobs, rent a car, and drive to the Mojave Desert in California. Because this is a Karen Russell book, a stray encounter could also find that same woman pricking her finger on a Joshua Tree spine, the “insoluble spirit” of the sentient plant leaping into the woman’s body, and the creature immediately realizing it has made a horrible mistake. “Compared with the warm and expansive desert soil,” it laments, “the human body is a cul-de-sac.”

In Orange World and Other Stories, Russell’s third short-story collection and fifth book, nature and humankind find themselves many mistakes removed from their first chance meeting. A May-December relationship that was probably doomed from the start, the romance between Homo sapiens and whatever life force connects all species on Earth has soured, their differences enormous, their protracted breakup violent. That only half the partnership—guess which one—is just beginning to understand this is where the horror begins for the characters in Orange World.

As she has done since debuting her 2006 collection, St. Lucy’s Home for Girls Raised by Wolves, Russell is playing to anxieties about humanity’s place in the natural world. Her characters tend to behave as if they’re not sure whether they belong to nature or it belongs to them, and when they do land on the correct answer, it’s usually much too late. Whereas Russell’s previous collections treated these worries with doses of myth and magical realism, in Orange World, Russell is fully awake to the nightmarish side of her imagination.

Born and raised in Miami, the author explicitly addresses climate change in only a handful of Orange World’s stories, most notably “The Gondoliers,” set in a near-future South Florida that is all but entirely underwater. In “Bog Girl: A Romance,” its title alone suggesting Night Shift–era Stephen King, a teenager drives a peat harvester through Northern European bogs while wondering how “he could feel so perfectly indifferent to the [clean-energy] debate, even seated in the cab of the world-killing machine. Right or wrong? Right or wrong?” The windstorm-farming narrator of “The Tornado Auction” feels no such detachment, admitting that “when you’re raising weather by artificial means, it’s hard to pretend you don’t have a hand in the Change.”

Those stories that don’t name the crisis are still haunted by it. In “The Prospectors,” the book’s Great Depression–set opener, an avalanche turns 26 men into ghosts who fail to realize that they’re dead. All they want to do is party. In “The Bad Graft,” a park ranger believes that the “tremendous blossoming” of Joshua trees across the Southwest is “the ancient species’ Hail Mary pass.” Even “Black Corfu,” which takes place in 1620, carries the ineluctable dread of a civilization threatened by a world that can do without it. That Russell embodies this threat in 17th-century Croatian zombies and reinvigorates the exhausted walking-dead genre —“posthumous surgeons” sever the hamstrings of corpses to keep them in their graves—is yet another measure of her gifts.

Russell brings plenty of surface-level absurdity to Orange World. “The Tornado Auction” really does feature a tornado auction. “Madame Bovary’s Greyhound” affords a point of view—or, at least, “a shimmering precursor to consciousness”—to the dog in Gustave Flaubert’s novel. The book’s title story concerns a minor devil, “a knockoff Satan,” who tricks new mothers into nursing him.

But as clever as all this may be, Russell has weighted the characters in Orange World with personal crises that—to them—can seem as monumental as global ones. All extinction fears are local, after all. Injustice and loss of reputation frighten the doctor at the center of “Black Corfu” as much as his island’s zombies do. In “The Gondoliers,” the youngest of four sisters has secretly violated a code they established in order to survive in watery New Florida. The farmer in “The Tornado Auction,” meanwhile, is at odds with his disapproving daughters and mourning just about everyone he’s ever known. “One by one they died,” he says, “my mother, my father, my brothers, my bosses, my rivals, my storms, my wife, and turned my world into an afterlife.”

Reviewers, novelists, and Russell herself have credited the strange frequencies passing through her stories to the writer’s supposedly weird home state. There certainly is some truth to that, though only as much as there is to the idea that Stephen King’s novels are terrifying because Maine is kooky, or that Flannery O’Connor’s fiction is so disturbing because she grew up in Georgia. What’s most unusual about Russell’s work is how paradoxically comforting it is, particularly right now, when it takes no great leap of the imagination to picture a world, orange or otherwise, without our species. This is not misanthropy or defeatism. Russell is scared, too, but her new book stands as a reminder that worrying about the future and grieving it are not the same thing.



One of the most impressive things about Taylor Swift is that she keeps finding a way to offend people simply with sound alone. The story’s been the same every album rollout since 2012’s Red: Swift, the onetime mascot for speaking your own truth over humble country strums, “goes pop,” garishly and greatly. The bungee-jump yodels of “We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together,” the Jazzercise drum line of “Shake It Off,” and the rude robotics of “Look What You Made Me Do” each represented a fresh, unapologetic kind of tackiness. The first listen, in every case, had to trigger a Yikes.

That Yikes, for both die-hard fans and more reluctant admirers, tended to flip to Yes! as Swift’s idiosyncratic cleverness came out with repeat listens. Even the dour Reputation, her 2017 album that amounted to a slight commercial disappointment for her, is more charming than it initially seemed. But at the present moment, hours after Swift kicked off a new album cycle with the single “ME!,” it’s very hard to imagine the reconciliation process replaying this time. The song is everything that gives pop a bad rap.

Reputation represented Swift’s attempt to have fun with the backlash that formed after her winsome persona curdled into a perceived smugness in the public eye. Packed with hip-hop tricks and electronic frazzle, the album sounded clanking, confrontational, and gray. Pastel images that flooded her Instagram in recent weeks advertised that she’d be rebooting somewhere sunnier for the follow-up, but few could have expected “ME!,” whose harsh cheer evokes a megachurch concert mass-dosed with ketamine.

It does open with a Reputation callback, in the form of Swift singing with the same ethereal vocal effect she used on her lovely single “Delicate.” This probably means Swift is working her story lines, hinting at a continuation of the “Delicate” meet-cute that was presumed to be about her current boyfriend, Joe Alwyn. This musical touch is the last personal note from Swift, who used to be known for small, concrete details of remarkable economy. In “ME!,” she sticks to highly generic scenes of phone fights, rain fights, and rainbows under which no one fights. The most memorable lyric comes when she shouts “Spelling is fun!” and then declines to spell out anything.

The only thing Swift reveals with this song is that she really, really wants a hit. The kind of hit whose royalty payments will be as sturdy and long-lasting as an oak planted in one’s front yard. The kind of hit that will play in Gymboree classes and cruise-line commercials until a meteor hits Earth. Quantization, the studio-software practice of aligning beats to a rigid grid as to nix any human variation, appears to have been used as not just a production tool but an art ethos. A marching beat creates fascistic order; the verses call to mind a ball bouncing across a sing-along screen. Every phrase’s conclusion is triple-underlined by blunt multitracking, as if the listener would otherwise miss the slant rhyme of rain and name.

The sense of a cruel grin reaches Effie Trinket levels for the pre-chorus and chorus. A tongue twister of clichés—c’mon, Taylor, “Livin’ in winter, I am your summer”?—tumbles down before Swift ricochets up, up, up into a dolphin screech: “Me-ee-ee!” This sound alone may ruin summer 2019. Horns exalt, but they sound like they’re ironic, in air quotes. This helium pep rally resembles the ones recently staged by Panic! at the Disco, as the former punkish types have settled into jock jams—which explains the presence of Panic!’s Brendon Urie, his voice at its most handsome and hollow here.

The song is less of a selfie than the title suggests, and it’s too bad. Swift’s cry of individuality has the air of vintage–Katy Perry empowerment-core, and though there is a Swiftian theme of embattled love, it’s buffed of any details. Amid all the “cool chicks” and “lame guys,” there’s only one “me” and “you,” and the song declines to specify any attributes to those two individuals, allowing everyone to plug in. And it barely makes sense: How rare is “a rainbow with all of the colors” anyway? The real message might just be that catchiness is an end in itself. The “you” that’s uniquely you-oo-oo is as susceptible to brain hijacking by melodic math as anyone else. Check your cabinets, because it feels as though all the world’s salt has been turned to Splenda.



It’s hardly shocking that Terry Gilliam might see a bit of himself in Don Quixote. The director and Monty Python member has made a career of tilting at windmills, mounting ambitious film projects, such as Brazil and The Adventures of Baron Munchausen, that are often plagued by studio meddling and budget overruns and end up feeling like implausible gambits. But for three decades, the giant that Gilliam could not slay was The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, a fourth-wall-breaking, loopily postmodern adaptation of Miguel de Cervantes’s masterpiece. That the film exists, and is coming to limited theaters this weekend, feels like an achievement all on its own.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the story behind The Man Who Killed Don Quixote has come to dominate the narrative of the final project. Gilliam’s film is a deliberately shaggy, recursive story about the all-consuming nature of filmmaking: A director (played by Adam Driver) finds that his long-ago efforts to make a Don Quixote movie as a student have left behind destruction and madness in the town where he worked. To anyone who has followed the parabolic arcs of Gilliam’s career, it’s a fascinating text; to the more casual viewer, it might come off only as a meandering mess.

In The Man Who Killed Don Quixote, Toby Grisoni (Driver) begins as a put-upon, soulless big shot, directing a fancy commercial in the Spanish countryside and contending with a grumpy financier known simply as “The Boss” (Stellan Skarsgård). Nostalgic for his old work, Grisoni journeys back to the rural village where he made an amateur black-and-white film version of Don Quixote. There, he finds that the old cobbler (Jonathan Pryce) who worked with him 10 years ago has never let go of the performance: He has become Quixote, the ditzy knight-errant who roams the country on a horse, looking for giants (a.k.a. windmills) to charge at and women to chivalrously rescue. Grisoni is quickly sucked into Quixote’s delusion, and Gilliam begins toying with the line between fiction and reality. He transports the characters into a 17th-century adventure, never quite settling on whether or not it’s all a dream.

Given the movie’s drawn-out production history, the meta-textual angle of Grisoni (jokingly named after Gilliam’s co-screenwriter, Tony Grisoni) trying to reckon with the damaging effects of his filmmaking is an interesting one for Gilliam to take. No doubt The Man Who Killed Don Quixote has wreaked havoc on his own life. To get a sense of just how cursed this film has been over the decades, one can seek out Keith Fulton and Louis Pepe’s Lost in La Mancha, a 2002 documentary about the epic unraveling of an earlier iteration of the project that starred Johnny Depp and Jean Rochefort. Others connected to the Don Quixote role over the years include Sean Connery, Robert Duvall, Michael Palin, and John Hurt, whose death from cancer in 2017 stalled out the most recent failed attempt at filming.

Even after he finished editing the movie, Gilliam was drawn into a legal battle with its former producer, and then had a health scare while preparing to premiere it at Cannes last year. As someone trying to preserve order while accidentally sowing chaos, Quixote is a fitting avatar for the director. But after that terrific premise is established, The Man Who Killed Don Quixote takes an awfully long time to wind to its conclusion, following Quixote and Grisoni through various misadventures that are as confusingly photographed as they are pointless.

Pryce, who collaborated with Gilliam on Brazil and The Adventures of Baron Munchausen, is beautifully suited to the role of Quixote. He’s an ornery presence with just the barest twinkle in his eye, who gives the knight’s old-fashioned air of righteousness just the right balance of dignity and ludicrousness. Driver, who becomes Quixote’s much-abused sidekick Sancho Panza, is a source of boundless energy for a movie that feels longer than its 132-minute running time, giving viewers a human figure to identify with lest they drown in Gilliam’s overflowing imagination.

The creative journey, and the magical bond between artist and subject, are what ignite Gilliam’s passion here. Unfortunately, the themes of The Man Who Killed Don Quixote are more compelling than the set pieces themselves. While the film is an undeniable triumph for Gilliam, that’s less because of the work itself and more because of the fact that it was released at all.



Since 2015, Adam Sandler has made six projects for Netflix—five feature films and a comedy special. The movies have traversed genres (Western, action, romantic comedy, showbiz mockumentary), and nearly all have been poorly received. Netflix doesn’t care. The streaming company extended its exclusive arrangement with the actor in 2017, claiming his viewership numbers were huge. And so last weekend, subscribers were treated to the latest Sandler project, Murder Mystery, where the premise and cast feel almost algorithmically assembled. Sandler and Jennifer Aniston play a bored married couple who take a European vacation only to get sucked into, well, a mystery involving a murder.

The film arrives after what one might generously term a Sandler renaissance. Long a target of critical derision (outside of independent films such as The Meyerowitz Stories and Punch-Drunk Love), the actor appeared to be doubling down on the cheap gags of his worst-regarded cinematic output (Grown Ups, Jack and Jill) when he joined Netflix. The Ridiculous 6, a spoof Western, was particularly castigated for its stereotypical humor about Native Americans. But in recent months, Sandler released a comedy special (titled 100% Fresh) that drew raves for its goofy sentimentality. He also returned to host Saturday Night Live, the show that launched his career, and acquitted himself well.

I wish I could say Murder Mystery continues that hot streak, but the highest praise I can give the new film, directed by Kyle Newacheck and written by James Vanderbilt, is that it provokes a few worthy chuckles. On Rotten Tomatoes, the movie has received a comparatively rosy 43 percent positive reviews (Sandler’s other Netflix efforts earned between 0 percent and 27 percent), yet the only thing that really stood out to me was the actor’s choice to wear a mustache this time around. Otherwise, his performance had the typical schlubby, laid-back energy he usually brings to these films.

But watching Murder Mystery, I realized that Sandler’s reliable sameness is no drawback, but rather part of his appeal to a company like Netflix. The lead characters he plays share the same basic personality—sardonic, chill, and quick to grumble about the pressures of being married with children. The films have extremely familiar genre plots: The Do-Over is an action comedy about mistaken identities, The Week Of is a Father of the Bride–style wedding comedy, and Murder Mystery is essentially an extended game of Clue featuring various colorful supporting characters as the suspects. Sandler’s big co-stars also tend to be actors he’s worked with before, such as Aniston, David Spade, Kevin James, and Chris Rock.

These are the sorts of movies to watch while you’re browsing the internet or playing Candy Crush on your phone. They’re background cinema, the perfect kind of offering for Netflix, which is enjoyed almost exclusively in the home. Murder Mystery is just convoluted enough to keep viewers guessing, but its cadre of potential perps (played by recognizable faces such as Gemma Arterton, John Kani, and Luke Evans) are easy enough caricatures that you can zone out for minutes at a time and still keep track of the general dynamics at work. Through it all, the mustachioed Sandler shrugs and giggles at the shenanigans, as if to let the audience know not to take anything too seriously.

The one exception to Sandler’s sleepy Netflix oeuvre is 2017’s Sandy Wexler, which I praised at the time as standing out from the pack because of its slightly more barbed approach to the vagaries of Hollywood fame. But even that movie had the same vignette-heavy storytelling, vibrant ensemble, and broad humor that Sandler relies on to play to the widest audience possible. Murder Mystery is the first of a new batch of four films Netflix ordered from the star, and his ability to keep pumping them out could help extend his shelf life as a big name, despite the fact that he hasn’t starred in a live-action studio film released in theaters since 2015’s video-game comedy Pixels.

Many of the major stars of the ’90s have struggled to keep their luster as Hollywood becomes dominated by well-known brands rather than marquee names. Tom Cruise has made a number of recent box-office disappointments (The Mummy, American Made), but he keeps re-upping his Mission: Impossible franchise to hang on to his summer-movie cachet. Will Smith agreed to appear in a superhero movie (Suicide Squad) and a Disney remake (Aladdin) to recover from a series of flops. Sandler retreated to streaming TV, where most studios are now pivoting in an attempt to stabilize their own future. Murder Mystery might seem like a fluffy, forgettable charmer when you watch it. But behind the scenes, it’s telling a story about the evolution of show business for a new, distracted generation.



In the opening scene of Fleabag’s second season, the protagonist (Phoebe Waller-Bridge), elegant in a backless black jumpsuit, is washing her hands with delicate care in a chic, Art Deco restaurant bathroom. Jazzy Muzak plays. So far, so seemly. But then the camera cuts to Fleabag’s face in the mirror, which is covered in blood, the shot a Kubrick-esque contrast of gore and geometric wallpaper. Unperturbed, she blots her nose with a napkin and hands another to a grateful woman who’s sprawled on the floor next to her.

“This,” Fleabag tells the camera, “is a love story.”

And there, in a single scene, is the essence of Fleabag, an almost annoyingly perfect show about the inseparable agony and ecstasy of being alive. Love, in Waller-Bridge’s world, comes hand in hand with carnage. Grief and humor boomerang endlessly off each other. Loneliness is intertwined with self-preservation. All these emotions and states pinball their way out of this Pandora’s box of a series, leaving behind a feeling that, in the end, seems a lot like hope.

Hope, plus admiration for how Waller-Bridge, at 33, is able to tell stories that are tightly contained in structure and yet sprawling in their conception of the human experience. The first six-episode season of the BBC and Amazon co-production—based on Waller-Bridge’s hit stage show of the same name—introduced the central character, a café owner in London grieving the recent loss of both her mother and her best friend. Fleabag, who continually breaks the fourth wall to share her thoughts with the audience on feminism, familial tension, sodomy, is, in her own words, “a greedy, perverted, selfish, apathetic, cynical, depraved, morally bankrupt woman.” She’s also totally enchanting. Waller-Bridge’s cherubic, maniacal presence and her inexorable side-eye made Fleabag one of the most distinctive productions of Peak TV.

The first season was always meant to stand alone. That the second, which debuts Friday on Amazon, is so successfully additive and so satisfyingly final in its conclusion, feels like a minor miracle. Without spoiling too much, the crux of the last six episodes involves Fleabag finally meeting her match—someone who, like her, has suffered the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, but whose response has totally diverged from Fleabag’s self-constructed armor of casual sex and deflectional humor. Fleabag, in other words, finds religion.

In the first episode, which essentially functions as a one-act play complete with introduction, complication, and catharsis, Fleabag joins her family for dinner to celebrate her father’s (Bill Paterson) engagement to her godmother (Olivia Colman). There, she meets a Catholic priest (Andrew Scott), who slowly draws her into his life, and vice versa. It’s a striking twist—Fleabag, the most sexually rapacious and cheekily nihilistic heroine in modern memory, forming a friendship with a man who’s willfully celibate and resolute in his belief that God has a plan for everyone. It’s also an ingenious disruption that forces her out of her comfort zone and into the proximity of a man whose habits and desires and coping methods are completely opposed to her own.

At a panel for Fleabag earlier this year, Waller-Bridge said that the motto in the show’s writing room is “Go Greek or go home.” The conclusion of Season 1, in which a tumultuous confrontation with her family forced Fleabag into a bruising moment of self-reckoning, edged the series closer to tragedy than comedy, tempered only by an act of kindness from a previous antagonist (Hugh Dennis). Season 2, in considering the fraught relationship between humans and gods, feels closer to Greek drama than ever, even if the show’s characteristic elements—morbid punch lines, toilet humor, Fleabag’s constantly tangoing eyebrows—keep it grounded among the mortals.

Everything wonderful about the show remains. There’s Claire (Sian Clifford), Fleabag’s sister, a high-flying, emotionally repressed, acerbic businesswoman who’s so uptight, she seems permanently on the verge of splintering like peanut brittle. There’s the noise Fleabag makes every time she encounters Claire’s husband, Martin (Brett Gelman)—a cross between a nasal ughgggh and a guttural erghchch. Colman, who claimed the Best Actress Academy Award earlier this year for playing Queen Anne in The Favourite, inhabits a very different kind of authoritarian in the role of Fleabag’s soon-to-be stepmother, a gorgon exuding clouds of backhanded compliments and passive aggression. (“Gosh, haven’t you got a lovely thick neck.”) In addition to Scott, who pitches his character aptly between savior and lost soul, there are guest spots from Kristin Scott Thomas and Fiona Shaw, the latter of whom ducks in from Waller-Bridge’s other show, Killing Eve, to play a therapist with dry forearms.

Still, the core of the series will always be Fleabag, whose asides to us, the audience, become more and more complicated as she reckons with the conundrum of how to keep yourself open to loving other people when the cost can be so damaging. Guinea pigs, she tells the priest at one point, “are born, they shit themselves with fear, and then they die,” a summation that seems broadly applicable to humans, too. In another moment, a character named Belinda (Scott Thomas) tells Fleabag about a revelation she’s recently had: Women are born with pain built into their biology, a kind of ache that they carry within themselves for most of their life. Its recurrence is inevitable; its tenderness brings its own strength. To try to avoid pain is to exclude everything that comes with it: kindness, consolation, love. Few creators but Waller-Bridge can make sorrow seem so serendipitous. Few shows but Fleabag can so gorgeously transform tragedy into hope, or something a lot like it.



It might seem a problem for popular music that young people are reportedly having less sex, drinking less booze, and throwing fewer parties than previous generations. Hedonism advocates such as Axl Rose and Miley Cyrus must be mourning—what in the world is there to sing about? The charts do remain fairly raunchy and rowdy, but slurry odes to antidepressants and Instagram scrolling have joined the mix. Apparently an even more on-the-nose subgenre is emerging: the anti-party anthem.

Ed Sheeran and Justin Bieber’s single “I Don’t Care,” the first new song in a few years from either crooner, is the sound of two of the world’s most popular bros proclaiming to be wallflowers. A scooting rhythm from the producers Max Martin, Shellback, and FRED hints that the Swedish hit-making oracles believe the white-bread “tropical pop” fad that both Sheeran and Bieber previously cashed in on still has juice. Fidgety and merry, with a darting melody and twee whimpers, the music captures a sense of awkwardness that could give way to abandon. It’d also make for a pretty catchy loading-screen soundtrack to some Nintendo Switch game that the guys would rather be playing.

“I’m at a party I don’t wanna be at,” Sheeran begins in a fast, rap-y cadence. “And I don’t ever wear a suit and tie, yeah / Wonderin’ if I could sneak out the back.” Then he switches to his pseudo-soulful rasp, which has come to rule playlists at grain-bowl lunch spots: “Don’t think I fit in at this party / Everyone’s got so much to say / I always feel like I’m nobody / Who wants to fit in anyway?” The aw-shucks routine is self-parody, intentionally or not. When Sheeran wore work-from-home-Wednesday clothes to a duet with the glamorously swathed Beyoncé last December, the ensuing ridicule drew attention to just how many Sheeran songs over the years profess pride in being a slob. His personal brand all along could have been described by the title of this new single.

For Bieber, squirming in a social situation has different implications. His struggles with maturing amid mega-fame have taken the form not only of pee-in-a-bucket stunts and sing-along apologies, but also of phoned-in concert performances and social-media confessions about his mental health. “With all these people all around I’m crippled with anxiety,” he sings on “I Don’t Care.” “But I’m told it’s where we’re supposed to be.” Scooter Braun, let him go home! Yet over the course of each verse, alienation turns to comfort as the narrators conspire with the plus-one on their arms. It’s hard not to think gladly of Bieber’s recent marriage to the model Hailey Baldwin, or the matching tattoos they share.

Perhaps it’s unwise for a song-of-the-summer wannabe to start by asking people to sing along about hating the barbecue they’re at. But “I Don’t Care” simmers with jubilation and provides a nice hero’s arc from panic-attacked to loosened-up. Besides, dissing one’s surroundings in song isn’t so strange this decade. The singer Alessia Cara launched a star career with 2015’s “Here,” whose narration of a rager was peppered with rude lines about preferring music more meaningful than whatever was on the speakers at the moment. It followed Lorde’s breakout 2013 smash “Royals,” an eye roll at all the hotel-wrecking mayhem glorified so often on the charts.

Songs such as these profess to level with the audience, reassuring listeners that it’s not weird to want to spend Friday night with Hulu rather than with shots of Hennessy. But there’s always a sour note of shade and humblebragging too. The nerds are mocking the jocks, except these nerds end up with thump-thump dance remixes and arena tours. The generally anthemic nature of the songs, too, hints that the singers doth protest too much. Deep down, they want to party. Lo and behold, “I Don’t Care” eventually works its way to Bieber making a reversal—“I think that we should stay.”

Truly antisocial celebrity-level pop is probably an oxymoron, but part of the thrill of one new arrival, Billie Eilish, is that she gets close to achieving it. Her album cut “Xanny” sounds like the desiccated memory of a lounge tune, with a performatively lazy version of jazz piano and bass rumbles reminiscent of construction equipment. Eilish mumbles about party monsters and their hangovers—“Their pretty heads are hurting / They’re awfully bad at learning”—with what sounds like a genuine sense of contempt. Sober at 17, she’s sure she’ll never understand them. Meanwhile, Sheeran and Bieber, a half-generation above her and needing to maintain their spot in the wedding-reception canon, put on the costume of disaffection only to take it off. They’re again selling pop’s great moderating message: You belong after all.



The first image of Claire Denis’s new film, High Life, is an arresting one: a baby, seemingly abandoned on a spaceship. Eventually, her cries are soothed over a loudspeaker by the only other living being on board, a wiry convict named Monte (Robert Pattinson). Together, Monte and the baby make for an unusual pair, and their dynamic throughout the movie is loaded with a sense of danger that gives way to a touching, if strange, emotional intimacy.

Tension mixed with pathos—there might be no better way to describe the films of Denis, and her relationship with Pattinson, one of the biggest stars the legendary French director has ever worked with.

High Life feels like a remarkable step forward for both of them. Denis is a brilliant but unsparing artist whose greatest works (including Beau Travail, 35 Shots of Rum, and White Material) have wrestled with colonialism, fraught romances, and male cruelty. High Life is a significant departure for her in terms of its scope: It’s the first project she’s filmed on soundstages, rather than in real locations. It’s also her first sci-fi film and her first that’s entirely in English. Meanwhile, Pattinson has moved on from his time as a tabloid-dominating teen idol best known for the Twilight franchise. He has since sought out roles in art films and collaborated with exciting directors such as James Gray (The Lost City of Z), the Safdie brothers (Good Time), and David Cronenberg (Cosmopolis and Maps to the Stars). Some of Pattinson’s upcoming projects include films with Robert Eggers, Ciro Guerra, and Christopher Nolan.

The actor’s obvious preference for artistry over guaranteed commercial bankability post-Twilight explains his pairing with Denis, but the two are still an endearingly odd couple. Last week, they sat at the offices of A24 (the indie studio distributing High Life) and chatted about the creative genesis of the film, how they began collaborating, and the kinds of qualities they admire in movie stars and directors. I was there to occasionally interject or steer them back on topic, but most of the conversation was between them, illustrating their peculiar creative bond (which might explain why they’re already planning to work together again). This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

David Sims: How did you two meet? What’s the Robert and Claire story?

Robert Pattinson: We met in L.A. five or six years ago. I had seen a bunch of her movies, and I’d been trying to meet her for years. With High Life, I was stunned to hear that she was doing an English-language thing. I knew [her casting director] Des Hamilton and forced him to get me a meeting.

Claire Denis: It’s very funny to think that. If I do casting for a film, I’m longing for someone; I want someone to say yes. But when someone is asking “Can we meet?,” it’s frightening because suddenly I don’t know what to say. I think maybe he will be disappointed. Maybe I’m not going to be the person he wants me to be. Maybe what he sees in my film, it’s wrong.

Pattinson: I’ve noticed that with a few other directors. There was another writer-director in England whom I was trying to meet. And I was really aware of her trying to avoid it. I guess because as an actor you’re so used to people telling you no all the time, you assume [she doesn’t want to see you], but I found out she’s just really shy and nervous about meeting you. And it’s like, Why? When you come from an actor’s standpoint, you have no power most of the time. Whenever you meet someone, you’re just like, “Please,” cap in hand, begging.

Denis: I think this power of [directors] choosing someone and the actor or the actress begging—I’ve always felt this [notion] is fake. I am also begging when I’m thinking of a film. I’m not like a god. My fear is so big that I’ll betray someone or that I’ll ask someone to be in a film and then betray the desire of that person. I have no power.

Pattinson: I never understand when people have a really hard time [working] with a director. If you know you wanna work with someone, you kind of have to accept that that is how they work.

Sims: You mean that if they have a worthwhile body of work, however they’re behaving must be how they accomplish it.

Pattinson: That’s how it is. If someone’s really crazy or whatever, it’s kind of up to you to figure out what your own boundary is. I’ve worked with some quite bullying directors. When I was younger, it was a lot harder to do. But now I could work with a total psychopath, and it would be totally fine.

Denis: I understand what you mean … It’s a chemical thing, you know?

Pattinson: Claire, the one thing I was thinking of—what was the process of designing High Life? Because I remember it was really complicated.

Denis: When I started writing the script, I wanted a garden, and the first [scene] was always in a garden. And then you could hear a baby crying, and then only by going toward the baby do you realize this garden is in a strange place … Maybe not on a spaceship, but somewhere strange.

Then I learned by working with this astrophysicist, Aurélien Barrau, that the shape of the ship in space doesn’t need to be aerodynamic, because there is no air. I was so stunned. I said,“So it could be anything?” And he said, “A box, anything. A shoebox.” And I said, “Oh, let’s have a shoebox.” The ship itself has to be very simple. Has to be like a jail. Banal. Those guys [on board] are prisoners. They’re not even allowed to fly in a sophisticated, elegant spaceship.

Pattinson: I’m trying to think where the original idea comes from. Do you start by going, “Oh, I’d like to make a movie about space,” or is it random things that arrive?

Denis: I never thought I was going to do a movie in space. I thought I was going to do [a story about] a man alone with a baby. The link for me is that emotional thing when two people meet, like when Monte [Pattinson’s character] opens the incubator and looks at the baby. It’s something he has not expected to feel in his life. That sort of love.

Pattinson: You can have incredibly dark subject matter [in your films], but they always seem quite kind. Even if the characters aren’t being kind to each other, there’s a kind tone. When you look at, say, [the Argentine and French director] Gaspar Noé’s films, there’s a playfulness to them, but you almost feel the director wanting to throw shit on the characters, but liking throwing shit on them. There’s a different way in how you present your characters, even when they’re doing something bad.

Denis: I cannot imagine filming someone I would not want to come to my place. I remember when I was young, when I was watching [the American director] Sam Peckinpah’s movies, with all those terrible bad guys. [The actor and regular Peckinpah collaborator] Warren Oates, for example—I love, I adore him. When he died, it was as if I lost someone from my family. He has this quality of being that lovable person, even when he’s doing terrible things.

Pattinson: There’s probably not a law that works across the board, but I find that actors who always get to play the hero in reality are total crazy people. And if they’re very comfortable playing bad guys, they’re generally really nice.

Denis: Also with Warren Oates and with you, when I saw you in films, I felt that there is the character and someone else who is inside. And that someone else inside, you know you’re gonna like that person.

Sims: What had you seen of Robert before working with him? What was your impression of him?

Denis: Watching his films, I never saw only the character. I always saw someone else, someone [to whom] I wanted to say, “Hey, hello! Who are you?” I care about whether someone is carrying a soul inside that is still visible in the film. [The American actor] Robert Mitchum, for instance. Whatever he’s doing, you like him! You want to hug him! You say, “Yes, I’m here! I’m hiding by the river, come fetch me!”

Sims: You’re less responsive to the actors who kind of transform themselves into another person.

Denis: It’s also someone you would like to shake hands with. That’s why I say Robert Mitchum and Warren Oates—they are great examples of people [like] that.

Pattinson: Who’s the guy—I read something the other day—who directed Dead Poets Society?

Sims: Peter Weir.

Pattinson: Peter Weir had a thing about casting: that you cast the person so the character they’re playing is the opposite [of] themselves. So you’re disguising the real self in the performance, and then you can have the reveal of the true self be the “climax” of a character.

Sims: Because Ethan Hawke wanted to play the extrovert [in Dead Poets Society], right? And Robert Sean Leonard wanted to play the introvert …

Pattinson: I thought that was really interesting.

Denis: If you’re mentioning Peter Weir [who is Australian], I would mention [the director] Jane Campion, because she’s also from the Southern Hemisphere. I always believe people from the Southern Hemisphere are different, are better than we [from the Northern Hemisphere] are. I remember [the film] An Angel at My Table, by Jane Campion—I remember when the main character, this writer, when she is no longer a little girl, when she’s in London and her first novel is going to be published. Suddenly, she knows she has to win this terrible fight against fate. And there is a single shot of her swimming in the sea in Spain. I thought, Aha, now this is someone who believes, as an audience, we are happy to see her swimming in a warm sea because the book is going to be published. And I thought, That director, Jane Campion … she is someone. I can meet her. And we met!

Pattinson: I remember when we were first doing High Life, I always liked that [my character] Monte feels dangerous. I was thinking the audience is going to be watching this story with a sense of dread. Here’s this unstable guy, everyone’s dead, and he’s with his daughter. I really thought that was gonna be the crux of the movie.

Denis: When she’s sleeping and you look down at her, and you say, “I could have killed you, or killed myself.”

Pattinson: And then when she grows to age 14, and she’s suddenly kind of an adult, as soon as she’s at the stage when she knows exactly what she wants, and it’s suddenly a very different thing to deal with. And you can’t handle that at all.

Denis: “I’ve got everything I need here.” When she says that, I am afraid.

Pattinson: And that makes Monte afraid as well, a little bit.

Denis: I’m sure, because if I’m afraid, then he is afraid. Because I’m him, a little bit. You have to be like Monte in a way, when you’re making a film. Otherwise it’s boring to do a movie.

Pattinson: I never really understand people who make movies because they just wanna make a movie. The only directors I understand, it’s basically fantasy fulfillment for them. They create a world so they can live something that they want to feel, rather than having to have this boundary. [The director] Robert Eggers, who did The Witch and [the upcoming film] The Lighthouse, he comes from production design. His absolute joy in finding authentic lighthouse things. It’s like having a dollhouse for him.

Denis: [Alfred] Hitchcock was probably a little like that.

Pattinson: And it’s strange, too, that [The Lighthouse] is in black-and-white, and he’s getting the exact tone of these costumes. It’s like Quentin Tarantino filming feet all the time. You kind of use the excuse of making a film to have a certain control.

Denis: But Quentin Tarantino—I like him because sometimes I share some moments of feeling completely joyful. Maybe not everywhere in his films, but …

Pattinson: I think that’s lost a little bit in cinema now. Like you don’t see as many characters where a director is really elevating them and saying, “These people are cool! They’re, like, really cool!” It’s just not a thing anymore.

Denis: Yes, like how Tarantino feels about the stunt girl in—what is the name of this film?

Sims: Death Proof?

Denis: Yes, yeah. And they are driving, those five girls, and this killer is behind them. Oh! It could last forever for me. I was almost shouting in the theater.



Imagine a man, one who lives in a stretch of vaguely frightening forest somewhere up north. And imagine that he wants to be your benevolent dictator. His pitch: Remove the current leadership. Destroy a neighboring nation and kill its populace. Then, conquer most of the continent. And somewhere in there, he’d also like to restore traditional values to the country, whatever that means. And he says he gets to do so because, 40 generations ago, some of his ancestors were in charge. His name is Aragorn, and he’s the good guy.

Aragorn, the crown-reclaiming hero of J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings series, is the sort of figure who serves as the protagonist in many epic fantasies. He believes in his divine right to rule, in the absolute power of kings, and in unbroken succession as the truest form of governance. In other words, he’s an authoritarian. This Sunday, when Game of Thrones kicks off its eighth and final season on HBO, a few more of Aragorn’s ilk will return to the screen. The pyromaniacal monarchist Daenerys Targaryen, the traditionalist lost heir Jon Snow, and their foils will be back and vying for control of Westeros’s Seven Kingdoms. Like Aragorn, these characters are framed as heroes, fighting against evil and striving to save the masses from unjust rule. But their agendas differ from those of their opponents only by degrees.

The heroes of fantasy are often presented as liberators—leaders who would deliver freedom or agency. Yet their actual focus is typically on claims of a legitimate hereditary right to kingship and the preservation of absolute monarchy. In the faux-medieval setting of many epics, these ideas might seem logical enough. But it’s worth asking why fantasy storytellers, who work in a genre wherein they can devise any system of governance they like, tend to settle on ones in which the common person has little or no say.

Game of Thrones, and A Song of Ice and Fire, the series by George R. R. Martin on which the show is based, centers on characters who are laudable more in their resistance to the graphic violence perpetrated by the series’ villains than in their concrete goals (usually reclaiming crowns or regaining lost treasures). For the past seven seasons, Game of Thrones has followed the arc of Daenerys Targaryen, who was forced into exile on the continent of Essos as a child after her father was overthrown as ruler of the Seven Kingdoms. Her journey back to Westeros to retake the throne has involved the acquiring of three dragons and multiple armies, as well as a slow and chaotic effort to outlaw slavery in a handful of cities in Essos. Although given to grand declarations about making a new and better world, Daenerys is, arguably, barely more interested in making her would-be subjects’ lives better than was Ramsay Bolton, the show’s longtime sadistic antagonist. Though Daenerys’s opposition to slavery (which was already banned in Westeros) lends her some moral credibility, her decisions as a leader have been draconian and often brutal, especially in later episodes: Political opponents meet their end through mass crucifixion and incineration without even a hint of a trial.

Thrones is primarily concerned with Westeros’s elite, a tiny aristocracy unconnected from the only occasionally seen peasantry. Those of humbler origin rarely hold positions of power, and even then they never rise beyond the status of adviser or soldier. The circumstances of the “smallfolk,” to use Martin’s term, are steered by those like Daenerys, who seek to rule with the justification of birth alone, usually masked in pretensions to moral standing. That Cersei Lannister, Daenerys’s main rival to the Iron Throne, takes more pleasure in her chosen methods of torture or execution—such as chaining a mother to a wall to watch the drawn-out death of her daughter and (it is implied) having a zombie bodyguard rape an adversary in a jail cell—is little comfort to those who have no meaningful influence over the future of their own country.

Martin’s characters occasionally depart from the traditions of their respective societies. Daenerys frees slaves; Jon lets his former enemies, the wildlings, through the ice wall he has been charged with defending. But in both cases, it was someone else’s tradition that they breached. Daenerys came from a family that had for three centuries ruled over a slave-free kingdom. Jon’s family had worked with the wildlings before, and had even taken one into their employ; it was no Stark tradition he broke, but one rather of his adopted brothers, the Night’s Watch. To their own familial traditions, both hold true.

While the monarchical coating of many epic-fantasy works is partly a by-product of their medieval inspirations, there may be something more intrinsic to the trope. Many fantasies follow the path of fable, with invented worlds created not to themselves be examples of good societies, but rather to house those examples. Readers can admire how a character like Jon rules without agreeing with the mechanisms through which he exercises power. That his authority is sometimes flexed through summary execution doesn’t matter for many audiences as long as they perceive him as fair. Creating representative government—creating a just society—is a complex process, not one that can be realized in a sudden genesis of utopia. But fantasy often is utopian. Chosen Ones battle implacable foes, and when a foe is defeated, worlds are made right and whole.

Perhaps that idealism is why the messy process of elections is so rarely seen. In the entirety of Game of Thrones, there have been four clear instances of a leader being chosen by his or her followers. But in every case, the group was choosing a leader for a martial purpose. Grey Worm was picked by Daenerys’s eunuch army, the Unsullied, to be their commander; Jon Snow was elected to head the Night’s Watch; Mance Rayder was chosen to lead the Wildlings in their campaign to breach the Wall; and Euron Greyjoy was selected to rule the bellicose Iron Islands when its succession fell into dispute. In every case, the situation was more military than civil. These were the choices of the populace, but only a segment of it, and only in exceptional circumstances.

Preston Jacobs, a popular YouTube figure known for his in-depth examinations of Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, believes that fantasy authors incorporate biblically derived norms into their works, though not always consciously. “People are looking for a classic story, and they naturally go to the Bible and the Book of Revelation and Jesus coming back as a liberating figure, and … ruling in a monarchy at the end,” he told me. Fantasy often echoes the primeval and mythical realities found in early religious works. Combatting evil, in fantasy as in faith, may be less about a political ideal than a spiritual one. In the genre, freedom entails less the abolition of serfdom or granting of suffrage than the achievement of salvation. Such stories create room for discussing the ideas of liberty and equity without the need to portray them.

In this vein, the British fantasy author and theologian C. S. Lewis, whose Chronicles of Narnia were fundamentally works of faith, stands out. Where Tolkien and Martin feature relatively complex systems of government in their created universes, Lewis doesn’t bother. The justice of the society writ large, and the wisdom of its leaders, is made to be admirable—not the actual mechanisms of its governance, which are mostly glossed over. When you have a sage king, Lewis suggests, there’s no need to bother about the details.

Moral idealism, then, is a crucial part of the business of fantasy. But Martin has attempted to undermine that convention in A Song of Ice and Fire. The Stark clan is unremittingly focused on service and honor, but they’re rewarded with repeated suffering. And while many of Martin’s fans are enthusiastic about the legitimist quests of Daenerys Targaryen, Jon Snow, and the now-dead contender for the Iron Throne, Stannis Baratheon, Martin himself seems less sure of them. In the novels, Stannis is portrayed as a grouch who burns his uncle-in-law alive in ritual sacrifice (in the show, his daughter and brother-in-law meet the same fate). Jon’s leadership of the Night’s Watch begins with an execution and carries on with a series of principled and unpopular decisions that lead to his death, resurrection, and another set of retaliatory executions, including one of a child. And Daenerys might talk a big game, promising systemic change for the peasantry (“breaking the wheel,” in her words), but she shows no interest in relinquishing even a modicum of her personal power in favor of majoritarian rule.

Jacobs told me that fans often misinterpret Martin’s works, believing the author to be sympathetic to characters like Jon, Daenerys, or Stannis. In Jacobs’s view, Martin’s work often seeks to condemn the characters of A Song of Ice and Fire, at least insofar as their reliance on regimes of brute force are concerned. Michael D. C. Drout, an English professor at Wheaton College in Massachusetts and a leading figure in the field of Tolkien research, makes a similar case for Tolkien. While Tolkien might have seen utility and dignity in his invented kingdoms, they were not themselves models of good governance. The “ideal of privilege in the service of good,” to use Drout’s expression, is noble in Middle-earth; figures like Aragorn are virtuous due to their character, not necessarily their political motives.

By contrast, in Westeros, an individual ruler’s high-mindedness often leads to greater suffering. When characters—whether the beloved Eddard Stark or the calculating Roose Bolton—attempt to implement their view of what is right and just, war tears through the country. The common people are the one left without homes, with their families slaughtered or starving. There are a few moments in which their suffering cuts through the battles and politics; a Season 6 episode focused on building a temple stands out. But the plight of these communities is an afterthought both in the novels and on the show. Any condemnation that Martin might wish to make of his characters’ statecraft is muddied when he declines to portray their principal victims’ tribulations.

In Game of Thrones’ seventh season, Daenerys’s adviser Tyrion appears to have the smallfolk of Westeros in mind when he asks the childless queen who should succeed her. She has no other heir, as far as they know. She is fighting a war, often entering combat with her dragons. If she dies, who will continue her work—which Tyrion believes will result in a better world for the oft-ignored commoners? Tyrion tells her that “there are other ways of choosing a successor.” Would the inhabitants of the Seven Kingdoms be given a vote? Unlikely. But the acknowledgment that alternatives exist to indefeasible hereditary succession was an unusual moment for the show. Though discussion of Thrones’ final season has often revolved around who will “win,” it seems there might at last be a real chance to break the wheel. Perhaps Tyrion’s “other ways” will bring a truly better future.

Game of Thrones began by subverting expectations for what fantasy could be. It cannot claim to have truly done so if it simply ends with an echo of Aragorn’s preordained rise to power.



In the 1988 Tom Hanks film Big, a 12-year-old boy named Josh Baskin (David Moscow) changes his life forever to impress an older girl. After being told that he’s too short for a carnival ride, he enters a strange arcade machine and earnestly wishes to be “big.” The following day, Josh wakes up as a 30-year-old man (played by Hanks), whose initial confusion about the corporeal switch later gives way to comedic hijinks and wholesome reflection.

The chief location for Big Josh’s fast-tracking into adulthood is the company where he finds work soon after the switch. With his childlike enthusiasm and surprising insight into the minds of youths, the bewildered adult Josh lands a job at MacMillan Toy Company. Early into his new gig, Josh nearly collides with his new employer, who offers a lasting lesson: “The boss should get knocked on his ass once in a while. It’s good for him.”

Big, which earned Hanks an Oscar nomination for Best Actor, capped a series of late-’80s films about body-switching. And now, a little more than 30 years later, the 14-year-old actor Marsai Martin has flipped Hanks’s film, a favorite of her mother’s, into a story that manages to account for both the universal frustrations of childhood in general and the specific ways that black girls and women are routinely overlooked by their peers and superiors alike.

In Little, released last week, Martin first appears as a 13-year-old named Jordan Sanders, who’s bullied by her middle-school classmates for being a nerdy science enthusiast. After an embarrassing moment at a talent show, she swears she’ll get back at them—and everyone else who belittles her—when she’s big (and a boss). The film then cuts to Jordan as a hyper-successful 38-year-old tech CEO, played by Regina Hall. The big Jordan is cartoonishly evil to all her employees, especially her assistant, April (Issa Rae). One day, a young girl visiting their office takes note of Jordan’s nasty attitude and casts the film’s inciting curse: “I wish you were little.”

Much of Little’s humor and warmth comes from Martin, who is a delight to watch, especially as the body-swapped adult Jordan. Some viewers might know her as Diane Johnson, one of the children on ABC’s Black-ish, but in the film Martin gives an impressive lead performance. Little’s snark gives her the opportunity to showcase a broad range: She harnesses all of Hall’s anger and toxicity as the older Jordan with an undercurrent of vulnerability.

Martin also produced the film. At 14, that makes her the youngest executive producer in Hollywood, a feat made more impressive by the story that Martin fired an agent who “didn’t support me when I wanted to create my own projects when there was no available roles,” as she wrote on Twitter earlier this year. “They wanted me to chill and wait for the roles to come, instead of create them.”

Little doesn’t just present Martin with the kind of starring role she might’ve had to wait years for as a black girl. It also highlights the tremendous talent of Hall, who has often been a criminally underrated actor despite decades of stellar work. Rae, who created Insecure, lends some of her trademark humor to the role of April, balancing adult Jordan’s caustic tendencies with goofiness and growing aplomb. The film was directed by the screenwriter Tina Gordon Chism and written by Tracy Oliver, both of whom are black women.

In this, the movie’s existence makes the case for one of its central themes: Black girls and women often offer one another invaluable support even when no one else will grant them opportunities. Early in Little, the adult Jordan tells April that she had to pitch her company 17 times before any investors would say yes to a black woman in tech; by the end of the film, that number takes on a new significance after Jordan takes a chance on April’s idea for a new app.

For all its moments of social commentary, though, Little is also a studio comedy. There are laughs galore, often right alongside the pithy analysis. (And several scenes feature the actor and singer Luke James as an earnest hunk.) One recurring joke, for example, involves Jordan’s biggest client, Connor (Mikey Day), a painfully recognizable tech figure. “I lived a hard-knock life,” the wealthy white man tells her in one scene, before lamenting the so-called struggle of having been given only $5 million by his father to start a company when he’d planned for $10 million. For anyone who’s grown weary of articles about “self-made” moguls who borrowed from the bank of mom and dad to get their footing, the film’s send-ups of Connor are particularly satisfying.

It’s disappointing, however, that Little includes an unnecessary transphobic joke early in the film. The pre-swapped adult Jordan calls a neighbor’s young daughter a boy, then says, “Oh, I get it. He’s transitioning!” after the neighbor corrects Jordan’s incorrect gendering of the child. It’s cruel, which the adult Jordan is meant to be, but the joke continues far beyond the point of establishing her mean-spiritedness and undercuts a film that otherwise aims to embolden young audiences. Does #BlackGirlMagic, which gets name-dropped several times, not extend to black trans girls?

There are a couple of other cringey moments, but Little is mostly a charming comedy with a killer soundtrack and heart to spare. Late in the film, a softened Jordan channels the central theme of Hanks’s Big with a lasting message for the movie’s young audiences (that doubles as an important reminder for adult viewers). “Everyone thinks you have to grow up to know who you are, but kids already know who we are,” Martin says as her transformed character. “The world just beats it out of us.”



John Wick’s reputation has always preceded him. When the moody, retired assassin (played by Keanu Reeves) first emerged in the 2014 cult hit John Wick, a mob boss called him “Baba Yaga,” recalling, “I once saw him kill three men in a bar … with a pencil.” Back then, Wick was still a shadowy presence—a folk villain whispered about by petty criminals, the last thing you saw before you got whacked. By this year’s release of John Wick: Chapter 3—Parabellum, our hero has gone mainstream. In the film, gangsters greet him with open arms and bottles of wine, and rivals compete for the multimillion-dollar bounty on his head. One fellow assassin confesses what a thrill it is to fight him, before charging at him with a sword.

That expression of fandom is a perfect reflection of how far the Wick movies have come in five years. The first one was a low-budget comeback for Reeves at the age of 50, a brutal action film that surprised audiences with its ornate world-building and surreal mood while also delighting viewers with elegantly choreographed shootouts. The second movie, subtitled Chapter 2, doubled down on the bizarre mythos of the Wick universe, where every other person on the street could be a highly trained assassin; each city had a special hotel called the Continental that served as a weapon-free safe zone; and everything was paid for using special golden coins.

Now, with Chapter 3, the saga has graduated to the status of summer-blockbuster franchise. The film has the even more baroque subtitle of Parabellum, the Latin phrase for “prepare for war.” Mr. Wick himself has progressed from folk figure to marquee idol, and Chapter 3 is told on a grand scale as a result. This worthy and fun sequel raises the narrative stakes of Wick’s journey, delves into the ridiculous lore that has come to define his world, and cooks up several new action set pieces to keep the viewer dazzled. At the same time, Parabellum is a clever meta-yarn about the burdens that come with superstardom.

In the first film, John Wick returned from retirement to exact vengeance on the Russian mob family who stole his car and killed his dog, which was the only remaining memento from his dearly departed wife, Helen (Bridget Moynahan). The second Wick saw him called back into the service of gangsters by an unscrupulous crime lord and ended with Wick shooting that crime lord on the grounds of the Continental, thus violating a sacred rule. In Chapter 3, the entire criminal underworld is after Wick, chasing him not just for a high bounty, but also for the notoriety that would come with being the person who killed the (supposedly) unkillable.

All three Wicks have been directed by Chad Stahelski (a stuntman who collaborated with Reeves on the Matrix films) and written by Derek Kolstad. The first two movies were heavily invested in setting up the feudal rules of a world of honorable assassins who hunt their prey in the city streets but respect the boundaries of their hallowed hotels. Parabellum is intent on questioning the foundations of this bizarre society, setting its leaders against Wick and suggesting that they, not he, are the real problem, and that perhaps the rules need to change. It’s an enjoyably anarchic pivot for a long-running series that still shows no sign of ending.

The main selling point for John Wick is its beautifully designed violence, and Parabellum outdoes itself in the first act, pitting a wounded, unarmed Wick against villain after villain. Wick fights someone in the New York Public Library with only a book to defend himself, is chased by motorcycles while on horseback, and has an especially bloody showdown with a group of killers in an antique-weapons store. Another sequence midway through the film follows Sofia (Halle Berry), an old pal of Wick’s, as she fights alongside two very well-trained dogs that attack on command; yet another sees Wick battling a heavily armored squad that can’t be stopped with his usual combo of dual handguns and deadly accuracy.

Stahelski and his stunt team excel at matching balletic movement with bone-crunching combat. Parabellum takes that approach to the next level by introducing a wise old dance teacher called the Director (Anjelica Huston), one of the many new faces Wick meets in his quest to clear his name. He also bumps into Berrada (Jerome Flynn), the minter of the magical gold coins; the Adjudicator (Asia Kate Dillon), who enforces the rules of the Continental; and a mostly silent figure named the Tick Tock Man (Jason Mantzoukas), who tells people when their time is up. The film is almost hostile to new viewers, expecting cinemagoers to be charmed by all these new flourishes to Wick’s thriving sci-fi world. If you’ve been with the series through now, you’re virtually bound to be.

There were moments in Parabellum when I wondered how the series could continue topping itself. Digging deeper into the traditions of Wick’s world only yields more evidence of how absurd the whole enterprise is; maybe future movies can find creative ways to smash it all up and start over. If the sequels keep coming, the John Wick story may one day collapse on itself. For now, the series remains the most reliable purveyor of high-stakes, onscreen combat around, a franchise that hasn’t yet been tarnished by its ongoing success. That’s the best you can ask of Hollywood in the summertime.



The NBA postseason needs to be shorter. This year’s playoffs started on April 13 and won’t end until sometime in June. Last year’s playoffs similarly lasted 55 days. That’s longer than NCAA basketball’s entire March Madness tournament, which runs for about three weeks. And it’s roughly as long as the NFL and MLB playoffs combined.

Historically, the NBA playoffs have been one of the most entertaining postseasons in all of sports, where rivalries are born and great players become legends. This year’s games, for instance, have given fans series-ending buzzer beaters, such as the one from the Portland Trail Blazers’ Damian Lillard in the first round against the Oklahoma City Thunder, and another from the Toronto Raptors’ Kawhi Leonard, who hit an improbable shot in Game 7 against the Philadelphia 76ers. But for every riveting series, there’s another one that’s tainted by the fatigue and injuries that come from athletes playing every 48 hours from October through April in the regular season, and then ratcheting up the intensity for two more months in the playoffs.

The problem starts with the very first playoffs round. The current best-of-seven game format extends far too many first-round series that are foregone conclusions, resulting in a slog of games that are mismatched and uninteresting to watch. On April 20, for instance, the Houston Rockets won Game 3 of their matchup with the Utah Jazz, making the series 3–0. However, the Jazz won the next game, avoiding a four-game sweep. As a result, the Rockets didn’t close the series until April 24, which meant an extra four days of practicing and playing that Houston could have spent resting for their second-round matchup with the Golden State Warriors. It’s important to note here that it’s virtually impossible for teams to come back from 3–0 deficits in any round, in any sport. It’s happened only four times in the National Hockey League, once in Major League Baseball, and never in the NBA. So a series continuing after the third straight win is basically a formality.

The ratings support the idea that there is fatigue around the first round of the playoffs. Through the first two weeks of the 2019 postseason, the numbers were down by 18 percent. Of course, part of the reason for the decline is the nonappearance of the sport’s biggest star, LeBron James, whose Lakers didn’t make the playoffs, causing him to be absent from the postseason lineup for the first time in more than a decade. But the ratings did bounce back in the second round, as ESPN boasted its highest second-round TV ratings since 2012, indicating that fans are still compelled to tune in to more competitive matchups.

The solution may lie in changing the playoff format itself. Under what’s called a “skunk rule,” higher seeds automatically move on to the second round if they win the first three games of the first round. In this scenario, if a lower-seed team wins any of a series’ first three games, then the series will be a traditional seven-game series. The skunk rule would potentially make Game 3 in the first round an elimination game, upping the drama early in a series.

Up until 2003, the NBA’s first round was a best-of-five series. The reason for the change to seven was twofold: More games equals more money for the league. And extending the first round lowered the chance that a better team would get eliminated in the first round, since five-game series were more competitive than their seven-game replacements. In a five-game series, Games 3 through 5 are must-win games. According to a 2010 study by the Harvard Sports Analysis Collective, the favored team had a 76.56 percent chance of winning a five-game series, as opposed to an 81.25 percent chance of winning a seven-game series.

Now, with the seven-game format, higher-seed teams have to win two home games and two road games in a row to sweep a series—a task that’s far more difficult based on how much harder it is to win on the road (having home-court advantage boosts a team’s chances of winning by as much as 14 percent in the playoffs). What’s more, the NBA has recently seen several stars go down to injury at crucial moments in the playoffs—Chris Paul in last year’s Conference Finals, Leonard in the 2017 Conference Finals, Steph Curry in 2016, Kyrie Irving and Kevin Love in 2015, and so on. The league has lucked out by not having an entire NBA Finals devastated by a team’s top star being hurt, but it’s playing with fire by piling on grueling minutes. With a skunk rule, top teams that win the first three games and sweep the series could rest up for the remainder of the run, lessening the chance of devastating late-playoffs injuries.

If the league wants to preserve player health and keep fans engaged and happy, then it needs to explore some outside-the-box solutions. There are opportunities to shorten the length of the playoffs—and they start with the first round. By June, nobody will miss those games anyway.



The Minneapolis-bred rapper, singer, and flutist Lizzo is proud to do things “Like a Girl.” The breezy empowerment anthem appears on her new album, Cuz I Love You, with a pre-chorus that sounds as though it were written solely to soundtrack the plush pink changing rooms of the Wing: “Sugar, spice, and I’m nice / Show me what you’re made of / Crazy, sexy, cool, baby / With or without makeup.”

“Like a Girl,” like some of Lizzo’s most popular songs to date, is a tad mawkish but nonetheless feel-good. So it’s not wholly surprising that the perennially positive singer sounded a bit defensive about the feminist-adjacent missive during a recent interview with The Cut, when she expounded on its meaning: After being told the track, and its premise, sounded rather commercial, Lizzo quickly justified the song’s concept by suggesting that her goal was to take ostensibly basic concepts—including the brand-dominated territory of “women’s empowerment”—and broaden them to include previously excluded groups. “I’m trying to be inclusive,” the artist said. “Could this song be in a Dove commercial? Yes, but it won’t. They aren’t thinking about everybody.”

Lizzo’s infectious music does often sound like it’s made with everybody in mind. It’s meticulously universal, the kind of art that’s said to push boundaries both because of its content and by virtue of who is making it. It feels good to root for Lizzo—not just because of her undeniable talent, but also because of what and whom she represents. Lizzo is, after all, a fat black woman; she shirks easy categorization along numerous lines, including sexual orientation. Her music is celebratory. It’s defiant and boundary-pushing by necessity. It’s also fun: Listening to Lizzo can feel like taking a SoulCycle class without all the requisite shame.
There has never been a woman like Lizzo at her level of pop stardom—and her road to fame has come with no shortage of slights, often rooted in or amplified by overlapping forms of discrimination. She has utilized her expanding platform to address racism, sexism, and fatphobia in her music and media appearances alike. It’s endeared her to a legion of fans, many of whom feel like misfits in their own ways. Lizzo has managed to harness the isolation she’s felt at various points in her life and produce work that marries social critique with self-affirmation, all buoyed by bounce-heavy production. This savvy has also primed her for commercial co-option. In that same interview with The Cut, Lizzo bristled at the way she’s been crowned a queen, an Icon™ of the sometimes-fraught Body Positivity movement:

“It’s not a label I wanted to put on myself. It’s just my existence. All these fucking hashtags to convince people that the way you look is fine. Isn’t that fucking crazy? I say I love myself, and they’re like, ‘Oh my gosh, she’s so brave. She’s so political.’ For what? … Even when body positivity is over, it’s not like I’m going to be a thin white woman. I’m going to be black and fat. That’s just hopping on a trend and expecting people to blindly love themselves. That’s fake love. I’m trying to figure out how to actually live it.”

This emphasis on her realness and authenticity has characterized much of the press Lizzo has received in recent months. Cuz I Love You reached the No. 1 spot on the iTunes chart over the weekend, ahead of even Beyoncé’s Homecoming live album. For many listeners, her ascent has been a welcome sign that artists—particularly women, musicians of color, and fat people—may not need to sacrifice their essential selves to find loyal audiences or success. In an entertainment landscape that often forces people to choose between valuing underrepresented communities and producing commercially viable work, Lizzo seemed to be doing both. And winning.

It’s particularly disappointing, then, that the artist reacted to a mildly critical review, published on Pitchfork early Monday morning, with a series of tweets denigrating the writer, Rawiya Kameir, also a black woman. “PEOPLE WHO ‘REVIEW’ ALBUMS AND DONT MAKE MUSIC THEMSELVES SHOULD BE UNEMPLOYED,” Lizzo tweeted. She then followed up with a series of now-deleted disclaimers that attempted to both downplay the original hyperbole and further drag the writer in question for her perceived pettiness. (In one, she suggested that only people who cook well can judge her food.)

The comments are troubling for a variety of reasons: Even without taking into account the bizarre invocation of unemployment in an industry already characterized by massive economic instability, this is a dubious kind of gatekeeping. To suggest that only musicians can critique music is a bizarre line to draw, an echo of the same sort of hierarchical thinking that much of Lizzo’s music and public persona has thus far explicitly opposed. The comments also betray a fundamental misreading of the purpose of criticism, which exists not just to rank artists against some imperceptible standard, but also to contextualize art within the genre, medium, and world it enters.

It’s understandable that any artist would be, to quote a famously cantankerous musician, “sensitive about [their] shit.” And for multiply marginalized artists such as Lizzo, navigating the boundary between shrinking oneself to fit repressive industry standards and over-marketing one’s own identity is tricky territory. Kameir’s review was a thoughtful assessment not just of Lizzo’s music itself, but also of how the musician’s prominence affects the fans whom she is most beholden to: “Lizzo does have a genre, something like empowerment-core, and she offers songs for an astonishing array of demographics: thick women, independent women, women in general, anyone struggling with body image, people who are single, people who wish to become single, etc.,” Kameir wrote. “Lizzo’s music performs an important social function. The sound might disappoint, but there will be people moved to transformations of their own thanks to her songs. And that’s important, too.”

The Pitchfork review was by no means scathing, or even mostly negative—nor was it a mean-spirited attack on Lizzo’s musicianship. Rather, this kind of thorough analysis is rare; artists such as Lizzo are too often either dismissed immediately or written about exclusively as “unapologetic” avatars of whatever identity is most convenient to name-check. Cuz I Love You, like much of the artist’s other work, has been met with near-rapturous praise from critics. This reception, and her response to one perceived aberration, recall Chance the Rapper’s reported outrage at MTV News for publishing a lukewarm review in 2016. The artist’s manager threatened that he would no longer work with MTV, prompting the publication to remove the post, which the writer David Turner later published on his own Medium account. (Again, the critic in question was black, a troubling detail for artists whose public personas hinge largely on championing their communities.)

In both cases, overwhelmingly beloved musicians—who gained popularity partly through their lovable music—lashed out at critics who were simply doing their jobs. It’s an avoidable shame that Lizzo’s reaction to a comprehensive, if also critical, response to her work has now served to distract from the music itself.

Cuz I Love You is, after all, an eminently enjoyable record. Even with its many soundtrack-ready bops, the album has no shortage of vulnerable, masterly songs with immense replay value. There’s the soulful ballad “Jerome” and the sexy ode to self, “Lingerie.” For every ad-ready “Like a Girl,” there’s an original, high-powered show of impressive vocal range such as “Crybaby,” on which she belts over brash electric guitar riffs: “I swore you’d never see this side / But it’s so hard to say goodbye / I don’t need to apologize / Us big girls gotta cry.” There are also funky anthems like “Juice,” a natural extension of the hyper-confident 2017 single “Truth Hurts.” (The latter track still has one of the most memorable lines in modern pop: “I just took a DNA test / turns out I’m 100% that bitch.”)
On the Missy Elliott–assisted “Tempo,” Lizzo is collaborative, sharp, and cheeky. The Ricky Reed–produced song’s chorus reminds listeners exactly what it is that Lizzo’s music, at its best, inspires listeners to do: “Slow songs, they for skinny hoes / Can’t move all of this here to one of those,” she sings. “I’m a thick bitch, I need tempo (Tempo) / Fuck it up to the tempo.”



This story contains major spoilers for the series finale of Game of Thrones.

“A boy born broken, raised to see himself not as disabled, just different.”

That’s how a newscaster described Oscar Pistorius in an uplifting segment on the South African runner before he became the first double-leg amputee to compete at the Olympics (and quite before he was convicted of killing his girlfriend). I came across the clip in a YouTube compilation documenting popular media’s obsession with portraying disability as something to be “overcome,” a trope that doesn’t so much help viewers understand people with disabilities as it does turn them into inspirational tchotchkes. There’s even a term that disability activists use for this sort of portrayal: the “supercrip.”

Tyrion Lannister knows the appeal of a supercrip mascot. “Who has a better story than Bran the Broken?” he tells a council of Westerosi lords in the Game of Thrones series finale. “The boy who fell from a high tower and lived. He knew he’d never walk again, so he learned to fly. He crossed beyond the Wall a crippled boy, and became the Three-Eyed Raven.”

Making the pitch for Bran Stark to be made king of Westeros, Tyrion bases his case, primarily, on its public-relations appeal. Stories, Tyrion says, are more capable of uniting people than armies or gold—and Bran’s tale of thriving in paralysis supposedly represents the most compelling biography among the prospective rulers of the realm. Tyrion might be right in this prescription, given how popular Branlike tales are in our own world’s history. All along a show about “cripples, bastards, and broken things,” Thrones ended up leaning into the clichés of disability it once complicated while also, fittingly, acknowledging them as clichés.

The supercrip is a powerful and an old stereotype. Its maudlin self-help applications are seen when para-athletes, for example, are treated as saints. If people with disabilities can excel, goes the logic of such treatment, able-bodied people should be able to push themselves even further (“Who would you be if you were born broken?” the newscaster rhetorically asked viewers in the aforementioned Pistorius segment). Broken is the sort of terminology many people with disabilities find offensive for implying that they are less-than—and it’s the sort of terminology that reduces their lives to simple tales about being defined by difference.

There’s also often a mystical component to images of disability. The line of characters whose physical difference goes hand in hand with supernatural power stretches from modern examples such as Marvel’s Professor X and Daredevil back to the blind seer Tiresias of Greek mythology. In 2016, after the death of Hodor on Thrones, I spoke with the scholar Lauryn S. Mayer about medieval attitudes on disability. She told me about the “idea that the state of the body reflected the state of the soul. If you were suddenly disabled, it might be considered a punishment from God because of some sort of aspect of your living.” But disability “also might be considered … a privilege because you were living your penance on Earth rather than going to purgatory. Going back to the idea of Christ suffering on the cross, it’s like, Here’s your test.” The legend of King Bran twines these two threads—the overcomer and the wizard.

If that legend is simplistic, it has to be considered in relation to Game of Thrones’ generally diverse and nuanced take on physical difference. Tyrion, one of the primary characters, is a dwarf; Bran fell from a tower in the very first episode. Whereas other heroic sagas have characters emerge unscathed from their highly violent adventures—or undergo one defining wound, such as Luke Skywalker’s amputation—injury was commonplace on Thrones. Tyrion received a facial nick in war; Jaime Lannister lost a hand; Beric Dondarrion had multiple lives’ worth of battle scars; Hodor had his brain short-circuited in a supernatural calamity. These developments countered pop culture’s comforting fantasy of corporal invulnerability for heroes, and debunked the notion of a fundamental distinction between people without disabilities and people with them. In an instant, anyone can move from the former category to the latter.

Throughout its run, Thrones paid attention to the body as a social marker. Tyrion was put on trial all his life, as he explained in Season 4, simply for being a dwarf. The Hound’s childhood burn wounds made it so that strangers perceived him as a monster. Melisandre used magic to hide the physical effects of centuries of aging so as to better seduce and inspire. Even in the cases of Brienne’s tallness or Arya’s childlike stature, being physically different shaped people’s lives—but largely only because it affected how others treated them.

For Bran, physical limitations did have practical effects. A boy who once loved to climb now couldn’t move independently from bed and began having supernatural visions. Making his way in the world required the assistance of others: Tyrion, crafting him a saddle; Hodor, hoisting him on his back; Meera and Osha and Jojen Reed, attending to and defending him. But rather than casting him as someone more existentially carried by others, the show was always clear that Bran was driving the journey north. He even had enough agency to appear to some viewers to be exploiting Hodor. As Mayer said, “Bran, who of all people should have some empathy for Hodor, is kind of an abusive little shit.”

But Mayer actually approved of this flaw in Bran’s character. “There is a huge step forward in the fact that you’ve got people in here who are disabled, who are complex, sometimes really annoying, sometimes heroic, sometimes selfish, sometimes unselfish,” she said. “I think [George R. R.] Martin is really trying to not put them into types or use them as some symbol for the suffering of humanity.”

The thematic implications of Bran’s crowning, however, might smooth out some of that sense of complexity. He, it’s now clear, was always the show’s exemplary victim of violence in the name of hereditary power, and thus there’s poetry in him being the one to “break the wheel.” That Martin and the showrunners tied his inability to walk to a mystical awakening puts Bran in company with characters throughout mythological and pop-culture history, but it doesn’t exactly humanize him. What defines his character now, other than what he can (see all of history, warg into creatures) and cannot (walk, want, feel emotions, sire children) do?

Tyrion—the show’s more fully fleshed-out example of all the contradictions and desires within people marked physically apart—knows how the perception of bodies can be as important as the lived reality of them. All his life, he had to fight against the prejudiced notion that looking different on the outside made him freakish on the inside. Now he endorses someone whose status as a “broken thing” really is tied to a deeper strangeness. By leveraging that strangeness—and wider perceptions about a “broken” boy who “learned to fly”—for his desired outcome, Tyrion’s championing of Bran has an air of subversion with relevance to our own world. But there’s also something all-too-typical about Bran: He rules humanity by losing his own humanity, which is exactly the thing society so often denies people like him anyways.



No one elevated South Central Los Angeles to the point of universal conversation like the late John Singleton. Filmmakers such as Melvin Van Peebles and Charles Burnett had both set their stories on this terrain previously. But Singleton, with his films, forced the world to take note of an area ravaged by violence and neglect, yet abundant with cultural distinction and richness. The director’s narratives are cinematic bildungsromans, canvases for young black men and women to discover their identities, to shape and come to terms with their inner selves, to fall in and out of love, to fight and reconcile, to evolve. He was our first hip-hop filmmaker, expressing vernacular and urban culture in a way that had not been so uniquely championed until he arrived on the scene in 1991 right out of USC film school.

When considering Singleton’s brilliance and influence, the example used most frequently is his debut feature Boyz n the Hood—and rightfully so. In this semiautobiographical work, Singleton brought attention to the disparities of life in South Central for young black men, a theme captured by one of the film’s most famous lines: “Either they don’t know, don’t show, or don’t care about what’s going on in the hood.” Through Boyz’s central characters, Singleton counters the negative portraits of black masculinity with a celebration of fatherhood and black consciousness.

As powerful as Boyz proved to be—earning Singleton Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Original Screenplay—the wunderkind would stray from this formula for his sophomore project. His 1993 follow-up, Poetic Justice, wasn’t the lightning rod that Boyz was, but it deserves equal consideration when discussing his canon. The film featured the young superstar Janet Jackson in her first starring movie role, playing a hairdresser plagued by grief after witnessing the retaliatory gang killing of her boyfriend. It presents a softer side of South Central and its inhabitants, a movie that the film critic Odie Henderson said “meandered like Éric Rohmer and swore like Richard Pryor.” Poetic Justice debuted after the Rodney King riots, when much of Los Angeles was in disarray and in need of rebuilding. With this in mind, Singleton shifted the narrative focus toward romance, family, and friendship.

Justice was also Singleton’s way of responding to critiques that he had largely diminished the experiences of young black women, namely single mothers, in Boyz, with one-dimensional characterizations. The late media critic and director Jacquie Jones, writing in Cineaste in 1991, said that the women in Boyz were cast “to symbolize the oppressions facing black men, as either barriers or burdens … Here, the female characters have carefully calculated, though secondary, roles which affirm the central theme of their blame and ineptitude.” Jones goes on to say that “as long as the humanity of young black men rests on the dismissal of black women, we, as black people, are not making progress—cinematic or otherwise.”

In creating Justice, Jackson’s character, Singleton had a definite vision. During a 1993 interview with The Washington Post, he revealed that the idea for Justice germinated from his thoughts about the girlfriends left behind once their partners’ lives were claimed by gang violence. In his book, Poetic Justice: Filmmaking South Central Style, Singleton wrote that he asked himself, after dealing with the insecurities of black men in Boyz, “Why not do a movie about a young sister and how all the tribulations of the brothers affect her?” He attributed that inspiration to his observation that “some of the most complex, sexy, diverse, three-dimensional women I’ve ever seen in my life all came out of my neighborhood. They all had a certain mold of substance.” From this vantage point, Singleton fashioned a black woman rarely seen on-screen to sit at the focus of his screenplay.

Singleton was similarly precise in his rendering of Justice’s style—the right image was essential. The box braids she wears were the collaborative choice of the director, Jackson, and two female choreographers he had worked with while directing Michael Jackson’s “Remember the Time” music video. Singleton also drew inspiration from the works of Italian neorealist filmmakers—most notably Vittorio De Sica’s Two Women, which he used to recreate Sophia Loren’s natural makeup look for Justice.

In a recent Essence essay, the writer Melissa Kimble asserted that Justice’s iconic hairstyle was a character in and of itself, not only marking Justice’s emotional transformation, but also symbolizing the beauty of black women. My cousin Heather, who died at the young age of 34, was a hairdresser as well, and she put serious wear on her Poetic Justice videocassette while braiding, hot ironing, and perming hair in her kitchen. I honestly believe her pursuit of a cosmetology license might have had as much to do with the representation she saw in Justice’s character as it did with her own talent.

I am not suggesting that Singleton successfully answered all of his critics. Michele Wallace, in a 1993 critique in Entertainment Weekly, questioned whether the film had a clear, relatable female perspective, expressing that she hoped the film would “stir further discussion in the black community.” Still, the sincerity and relevance of Justice speaks to Singleton’s ability to tap into a part of the culture in desperate need of visibility. Kimble wrote that for her, the character marks “the first time I’d prominently seen a Black woman onscreen, openly dealing with grief and depression after tragically losing a loved one to violence … Even in the complexity of his subject matter—violence, racism, and poverty—Singleton made space for the resilience of Black women.”

Singleton wasn’t an auteur, so to speak—his visual and screenwriting styles were not flashy or complex. In his view, what was more vital and necessary than style was substance: telling the long-compromised stories of the men and women of South Central Los Angeles through layered characters. “[I am not in it] to right the wrongs of American cinema,” he wrote in his book. “I love movies. Period. Classic structure. Classic characters … I direct to protect my vision … I am a storyteller consummate.”

Poetic Justice’s focus on the trauma and recovery of young black women in urban environments defied traditional expectations of who can be at the center of cinematic narratives. That John Singleton had the tremendous foresight to incorporate these experiences into film is more valuable than any trick of the camera. As the movie critic A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times earlier this week, comparing Singleton and the Moonlight director Barry Jenkins, “[They] are directors whose primary motivation is their unstinting love for the people they conjure into being.” This is the work that makes for an indelible and long-lasting legacy—one that John Singleton so deftly and richly crafted.  



It has become common practice to baptize one and all as “icons” and “activists.” Leah Chase, the legendary chef of New Orleans’s famed Dooky Chase’s Restaurant, was indeed both at a time before today’s reduction of the terms. Chase, who died on June 1 at the age of 96, quietly changed the culinary and political culture of New Orleans with her work, leaving behind a rich legacy of African American innovation and civil-rights leadership. I met Chase for the first time more than 25 years ago, and always reveled in her company. She had an insatiable curiosity about food, and loved to go to the city’s new restaurants as soon as they opened. There is a hole in the fabric of New Orleans, but it is smaller than the one in my heart.

Leah Chase (née Lange) was born in the countryside of Madisonville, Louisiana, on January 6, 1923. The childhood stories she shared about her family, their vegetable-garden plot, and the table where they communed for daily meals demonstrated the influence that her upbringing had on her cooking career. She was someone for whom fresh, local, and seasonal were not buzzwords, but rather ways of life.

The vicissitudes of the segregated South meant that Chase’s town had no schools for black children that went beyond the sixth grade, so she was sent to New Orleans to complete her education. There, a new world opened up to her. Following her graduation from high school at age 16, Chase worked briefly as a seamstress doing piecework, but the job proved stultifying to her nimble mind. Eventually, she found her way into the food-service industry as a waitress. The restaurant business would later become her lifelong love.

In 1945, she met and married Edgar “Dooky” Chase Jr., a trumpeter and bandleader. His family owned a small sandwich shop in the Tremé neighborhood of New Orleans, which would become the springboard that she needed. Gradually, she transformed the place into a fine-dining establishment that provided the city’s black community with all the amenities that were available in the white restaurants they were banned from: fine china, heavy napery, crystal glasses, and a menu that reflected African American tastes (such as her rich seafood gumbo and garlicky shrimp Clemenceau). Dooky Chase’s first appeared in The Negro Motorist Green Book in 1948.

The restaurant was a linchpin of black New Orleans life, where very special dates were brought, fraternity and sorority luncheons and dinners were held, and graduations were celebrated. It also became a centerpiece for the changes that were taking place in the city and around the country. When the Freedom Riders were setting off on their perilous journeys, they often went fortified by a meal from Chase’s kitchen. And when they returned beaten and bloodied, they were again soothed by her fare. She served the heroes of the civil-rights movement, such as Thurgood Marshall, Martin Luther King Sr., and Martin Luther King Jr.; the local activist Oretha Castle Haley worked in the restaurant; and an upstairs room of the establishment became the meeting place for black and white political strategists at a time when racial mixing was illegal in the city. Chase’s impeccable reputation (and that of the restaurant) made Dooky Chase’s unassailable.

Edgar Chase was an impresario who presented the first desegregated concert in New Orleans. So when black musicians came to town, they went to Dooky Chase’s. The restaurant’s three dining rooms had walls adorned with black paintings and photographs, and it still houses one of the major collections of African American art in the city. The list of those who placed their feet under Leah Chase’s tables crosses generations: Sarah Vaughan and Nat King Cole, the Jackson 5, Beyoncé and Jay-Z. Quincy Jones had a standing food order to be express mailed to him, and Ray Charles immortalized the restaurant in his version of the song “Early in the Morning.” Chase famously chided then–presidential candidate Barack Obama for adding hot sauce to her gumbo.

Notables came, but so did everyday people who appreciated the cuisine she served up with love and attention—everyone was a star to Chase. When Hurricane Katrina devastated the city in 2005, Dooky Chase’s was almost lost. But through Chase’s personal grit, and with the help of family, friends, and public fundraisers, the art was rescued and the dining room and kitchens were restored. Chase got back to her business of bringing the world together at the table through food, and she kept at it until her death.



If every generation gets the brittle, nihilist, painfully “real,” sexually joyless cultural rendering it deserves, then the good news for Generation Z is that Euphoria shows signs of progress. The 1980s had Bret Easton Ellis’s Less Than Zero, a coolly disaffected portrait of life in Los Angeles that featured heroin, rape, snuff films, and a 12-year-old sex slave. The ’90s had Kids, Harmony Korine’s bleakly disaffected portrayal of teenage skater kids sharing drugs and HIV. The 2000s had Skins, Jamie Brittain’s entertainingly disaffected British import about pill-popping, bed-hopping high schoolers. Each work sparked its own kind of moral panic, accompanied by a clamor of voices urging audiences to heed the alarming truth of How Young People Live Now.

Which, well, kind of. Less Than Zero, it transpired, was less an accurate picture of Gen X dysfunction than it was a book inspired by Ellis himself, with his Bennington College mystique, his “suitcase full of drugs,” and his father’s $40 million property commissions. Kids was mired in the predilections and obsessions of Korine and the director/photographer Larry Clark. Euphoria, too, is not so much an all-encompassing portrait of a generation than a work based on the writer Sam Levinson’s specific experiences of addiction, anxiety, and recovery. In its best moments, it’s a thoughtful, openhearted story about teenagers trying to navigate life as the first fully-online generation, test subjects in an unfettered landscape of dick pics, adult predators, and synthetic hallucinogens. But it’s also the kind of drama so relentlessly provocative—images of erect penises crop up with the persistence and frequency of weeds in springtime—that it prompts a question: Who is this supposed to be for?

The protagonist in Euphoria is Rue, a 17-year-old addict played spectacularly by the former Disney Channel star Zendaya—a casting decision that practically ensures the show’s audience will skew younger than the typical HBO viewer. Rue narrates the show, starting with her traumatic birth (forced through “the cruel cervix of my mother, Leslie”), and then documenting the summer she first gets out of rehab. Her addiction, she explains, began with a panoply of different diagnoses including ADHD and OCD, and with medication that left her feeling numb even as it failed to alleviate her semipermanent state of panic. In a montage of lightning-fast cuts, Euphoria details the realities Rue grew up with: the aftermath of 9/11; obscene DMs from strangers; active-shooter trainings at school; ubiquitous, hard-core, violent pornography.

What defines Zendaya’s performance is her ability to quickly shift modes, communicating both Rue’s cynical, hardened edges—in one scene, she gives an old-fashioned slide tutorial on the art of the dick pic—and her vulnerability. Shuffling through the school corridors in skater shorts with a hoodie pulled over her head, Rue’s a truculent waif with impossible charm. In the first episode, as she describes in the voice-over the first time she got high enough to quiet everything inside her, the camera stays on Zendaya’s face the whole while as her features relax and contort. She makes even the show’s most outrageous moments, like Rue taking a hit of fentanyl off the knife of a cartoonish drug dealer with face tattoos, land.

Euphoria also finds its heart in Rue’s relationships with others, like her guilty bond with her younger sister, Gia (Storm Reid), who discovered Rue when she was overdosing and idolizes her. More loaded, and more intoxicating, is Rue’s friendship with Jules (Hunter Schafer), whom she meets at a party after Jules has publicly slashed her own arm with a knife. Jules, like Schafer, is trans, a fact that the show underlines only to explore Jules’s compulsion for risky sex with strangers and her dependency on being desired. For all the fanfare over Euphoria’s penis-festooned locker-room scene in the second episode, the most disturbing and questionable moment by far comes when Jules is shown having sex (an act of statutory rape) with a much older man (played by Eric Dane). Augustine Frizzell, who directs the pilot, portrays Jules’s obvious physical pain, and her helplessness, in a way that feels almost obscene.

The strangest thing about Euphoria’s most quote-unquote shocking interludes is that so few of them seem to be integral to what the show does best. Rue’s fragmented internal state, her frantic desire to use, and the powerful connections she forges with others that momentarily console her, are the most interesting things to watch. Otherwise, the series’ attempts at portraying modern teenagehood can seem exploitative. Levinson’s proliferation of graphic sexual imagery is defensible as a way to communicate how much it saturates life online—to what extent kids and teenagers are exposed to unsolicited and unwanted content at all moments of the day. (“I know your generation relied on flowers and father’s permission,” Rue explains assertively in a voice-over, “but it’s 2019, and unless you’re Amish, nudes are the currency of love. So stop shaming us.”)

In other scenes, though, Levinson seems only to want to scandalize. The story of Kat (Barbie Ferreira) features the degrading loss of her virginity, followed by a foray into cam-work that the series questionably suggests could be empowering. (Kat’s NSFW Skype call with an obese middle-aged man who wants to be humiliated for his micro-penis is murky in its motivations.) If Euphoria wants simply to terrify parents with the darkest corners of an unrestricted search engine, that’s one thing. But the show also has a clear, meta grasp of how influential works of pop culture can be. The teenagers in Euphoria get their formative sexual education on Pornhub, but they learn about love from My So-Called Life and Gilmore Girls. Levinson even stages his locker-room scene as an inverted homage to the opening sequence of Carrie, which lingers pruriently and uncomfortably on the fully naked bodies of teenage girls.
In that sense, Euphoria’s provocations can feel as blasé and as cynical as Bret Easton Ellis’s fictional gang rape of a drugged 12-year-old. Trolling the Family Research Council with graphic scenes of underage sex, violence, and drug use is easy to do. What’s harder is using the same kind of imagery and action to make a point, or a change. From the first four episodes of Euphoria, it’s hard to discern whether the series will take advantage of its magnetic stars Zendaya and Schafer, and their palpable chemistry, to tell a different kind of story from the glumly incendiary ones we’ve seen before.



In Jim Jarmusch’s The Dead Don’t Die, a terrible calamity engulfs the world: Zombies rise from the grave and start indiscriminately consuming the flesh of the living. The townspeople of Centerville, the fictional sleepy burg where the film’s action is set, react as one might imagine, by running in terror, barricading themselves in their homes, and praying for survival. Some of them hope against hope that the whole thing will end as mysteriously as it began. “Maybe it’ll all just go away, like a bad dream,” says Cliff (played by Bill Murray), one of the local police officers trying to combat the undead threat. “I doubt it,” deadpans his colleague Ronnie (Adam Driver).

It’s the kind of bleakly funny exchange Jarmusch has long excelled at, but it’s also the philosophy underpinning the project, which presents itself as a spoof but mostly comes across as a deeply cynical film about the future of our species. Any great zombie movie doubles as a piece of social commentary, and yet Jarmusch’s droll parable about the end times seems to predict that humanity will greet the apocalypse with little more than a baffled shrug. The Dead Don’t Die is the first horror film I’ve seen that seemed as likely to lull me to sleep as to give me nightmares.

The general trope of a reanimated horde shuffling toward its prey ready to chomp is such a familiar one that the simplest tweaks—such as 28 Days Later making its zombies able to run—feel like a revolution. Jarmusch’s big joke is that, in death, people return to the obsessions they had when they were alive, so a corpse played by Carol Kane wanders around aimlessly muttering “Chardonnay” and trying to break into a liquor store. It’d be cute if it hadn’t been done before, and better, by George A. Romero (the master of this particular subgenre), who dispatched his monsters to a shopping mall to mock American consumerist society in Dawn of the Dead.

Instead, the spookiness of The Dead Don’t Die comes across most effectively in strange little details. Officers Cliff and Ronnie first realize something weird is going on when the sun doesn’t set at its appointed hour, every TV signal starts to break up into weird static, and a mournful country song (fittingly titled “The Dead Don’t Die”) by Sturgill Simpson keeps playing on the radio. When Cliff asks why it’s so familiar, Ronnie answers with Driver’s trademark blankness: “It’s the theme song.”

Jarmusch slips in fourth-wall-breaking moments like this one throughout the action—as if, given that zombies exist only in the movies, characters such as Ronnie start believing they must be inside one right now. What larger purpose this approach serves, though, I couldn’t fully discern. It could be a comment on the human tendency to fantasize. Grafting the strangeness of real life onto the comforting narrative of a genre film is a concept many of us lean on to get through the day, after all, so maybe Jarmusch is poking fun at that. Or perhaps he’s just looking for something to set the action of The Dead Don’t Die apart, because once the undead start staggering around and eating people’s flesh, things start to feel awfully lifeless (pardon the pun).

Though made on a small budget, the film features a stacked ensemble of Jarmusch regulars, some of whose cameos are better than others. I was charmed by the banter between Danny Glover and Caleb Landry Jones as shopkeepers who bar themselves in a hardware store, and by Tilda Swinton’s performance as a samurai-sword-toting Scottish mortician. I was less intrigued by Steve Buscemi as a Donald Trump supporter wearing a red hat and wielding a shotgun, and by Selena Gomez as a hipster from Cleveland in search of a fun night on the town. Jarmusch’s script ping-pongs from location to location, character to character, but viewers are never given a reason to care about any of them.

My favorite Jarmusch films, such as Dead Man, Mystery Train, and 2016’s quiet masterpiece Paterson, have the proper empathy for their characters to balance their sometimes mordant outlook. Not so with The Dead Don’t Die. In fact, the funniest and most relatable person in the movie is Ronnie—who, when faced with the end of the world, calmly reminds everyone around him that there’s nothing they can do to stop it. Driver somehow projects a sort of comfort through this grim pessimism; even in a mostly throwaway role like this one, he remains one of the most transfixing performers working in Hollywood right now. But The Dead Don’t Die has little else to offer. The world might be ending, but people still go to the movie theater to be entertained, and Jarmusch seems to have forgotten that part of the equation this time around.



This article contains spoilers for Game of Thrones Season 8, Episode 4.

As Tyrion and Varys debated whether to turn on the queen they serve in the most recent episode of Game of Thrones, one of them made clear that Daenerys Targaryen is not his ultimate boss. Something more abstract is.

“You know where my loyalty stands,” Varys told Tyrion. “You know I will never betray the realm.”

“What is the realm?” Tyrion replied. “A vast continent home to millions of people, most of whom don’t care who sits on the Iron Throne.”

“Millions of people, many of whom will die if the wrong person sits on that throne,” Varys said. “We don’t know their names, but they’re just as real as you and I. They deserve to live. They deserve food for their children. I will act in their interest, no matter the personal cost.”

His response had the ring of a presidential stump speech rallying for a stronger social safety net. But it drew on even broader political philosophies. We don’t know their names, but they’re just as real as you and I is a simple reality with not-so-simple historical implications. Thou shalt not kill; all men are created equal; liberté, égalité, fraternité—each phrase is a way of codifying a universal right to life. Just about every great social conflict comes down to enforcing, expanding, or limiting such codes. American anti-racism activists have recently put the implied tension in stark new terms, asking: Whose lives really matter?

As Thrones enters its final sprint, this question is also emerging as a central one in the story. The societies of the show had long tolerated regular folks getting crushed under the “wheel” of noble-house intrigue, smashed like so many of Orson Lannister’s beetles. In Westeros, men of power—Joffrey, Ramsay—tortured and killed for pleasure and personal gain; in Essos, oligarchs enslaved vast populations. But the heroes of the show, in their various ways, fought for human value and agency. Arya avenged the unjustly killed. The Hound recanted his murderous past and swore to follow a new, more empathetic code. Jon Snow rallied against the dead in the name of protecting all who live. Dany says her destiny is to end tyranny—to liberate commoners from cruel rulers.

Her coalition has a perfect foil in Cersei Lannister, who talks openly of using her subjects as human shields and has surrounded herself with similar misanthropes. The best scene of this week’s episode may have been when Tyrion attempted to negotiate with Cersei’s adviser Qyburn. Trying to persuade the former maester to swing negotiations toward peace, Tyrion says that he doesn’t “want to hear the screams of children burning alive.” Qyburn’s reply is all too muted: “No, it is not a pleasant sound.” A look of bafflement comes over Tyrion’s face, followed by resignation. He’s realizing that the two sides of the war are not separated merely in loyalty, but also in morality.

Dany knows this fact all too well. Referring to her drive to King’s Landing as “the last war,” she has the same optimism as thwarted idealists who talked about the “war to end all wars” in 1914. Yet the conflict is not as simple as a battle between those who value life versus those who are fine with mass death (that was last week’s battle). Maximizing the common good is a fine goal, but what does that mean in practice? Dany appears to believe that eliminating a horrible tyrant at the cost of a city’s population will be an acceptable trade-off. Varys sees her call on that count as a troubling sign: More compromises involving mass murder may come to pass under a Queen Daenerys. Fans are speculating that Dany is going “mad” like her father, who enjoyed burning his perceived enemies alive. What’s happening more explicitly is a clash of calculations about which ends justify which means, and Thrones has so far been coy about how that math should play out.

In fact, it feels strange to have such a high-minded ethical dilemma unfolding in this particular show’s brutal universe. Thrones has made a mockery of traditional ideas about “goodness” and “heroism”; some of the most outwardly noble characters—Ned, Robb—brought on their spectacular demise by sticking to codes of honesty and selflessness. But perhaps what’s been going on the whole time is a delineation between honor and goodness. Following a restrictive oath and insisting on telling the truth may serve some abstract notion of what’s right, but it doesn’t always save lives. On this show, it can do quite the opposite.

Thrones’ supernatural side also throws kinks in quests to save “the realm.” After all, the show’s gods regularly intervene in mortal affairs, designating some lives as more significant than others. Jon Snow rose from the dead once; Beric Dondarrion did so multiple times. But in both cases, a logic is being followed: Save one life to save the many. Beric rescued Arya, who rescued humankind. That they were confronting the Night King at all is thanks to Jon. “Chosen one” types, Thrones insists, are saviors in the literal sense of the word. Dany believes that she is one such savior—that she’s serving “destiny”—and she may be right. As Tyrion points out when Varys is complaining about the khaleesi’s destiny obsession, she really did walk out of a blazing fire with three hatched dragons. Some god is on her side.

Which, it must be remembered, is a way of saying that the showrunners have been on her side. Fiction authors are gods of sorts, and certain characters inevitably matter more to the story. One of the discomfiting things about this season has been how plainly the calculations about such worthiness have been made. In the run-up to the Battle of Winterfell, a bevy of farewell scenes telegraphed one of the most famous themes of Thrones: Anyone can die. Yet when the battle came, more characters survived than were expected, and there was no rational explanation for why they did. Rather, a call clearly had been made by the showrunners about who was most expendable in the cast, and who they still needed for the plots they’d planned for later in the season.

With each death, too, comes the question of whether the character gets the “proper” send-off—a way of dying, and a post-death mourning, that feels proportional to the value he or she provided to the show. The funereal opening of this latest episode served that purpose while also underscoring the life-matters philosophy held on one side of the Last War. Jon’s speech placed particular emphasis on the weight of each person lost. “We’re here to say goodbye to our brothers and sisters, to our fathers and mothers, to our friends,” he said, in the sternest voice he’s ever used. “Our fellow men and women who set aside their differences to fight together and die together so that others might live. Everyone in this world owes them a debt that can never be repaid.”

Yet on the pyres were the Dothraki, the Essos fighters whose fate on Thrones has generated a wave of criticism from viewers. The Dothraki riders represented a large portion of a society that had pledged fealty to Daenerys. At the Battle of Winterfell, they were sent out in front of the rest of the army, and then quickly, quietly snuffed out. The only mention of them on Sunday was when Tyrion, in passing, said that “the bulk of the remaining Dothraki” would ride south. But they did not get  a memorial moment other than a brief shot in the funeral scene. If the Dothrakis’ entire arc involved racist tropes—noble savages, white saviors—it may have now ended with one final one. Their lives, from the point of view of Thrones as a TV show, didn’t matter very much.

With that precedent set, the public beheading of Daenerys’s adviser Missandei seems particularly cruel. It’s not that she, the only woman of color in the regular cast, didn’t matter: Dany and Grey Worm were defined, in part, by how much they loved her. As a kidnapped and enslaved citizen of a peaceful island nation, Missandei most exemplified the importance of Dany’s breaker-of-chains mission. For a tyrant to execute her just to taunt a would-be liberator has, thus, great symbolic weight. But that’s the problem—she served mostly as a symbol and a means through which other characters were developed. She was captured offscreen by the Lannisters and given one final (though powerful) word at the moment of her death: an ending that reflected how marginal Missandei was made to be all along.

In a way, her death—which has the feel of happening mostly to spur action in Dany—reflects the grim paradox of the Dragon Queen’s mission as she pushes forward into King’s Landing. Dany’s side wants to save the marginal: all the men and women who aren’t kissed by destiny. But accomplishing that mission may take the mass death of those exact people. Dany is taking it upon herself to make the call on who gets to enjoy their inherent right to existence and whose rights will have to be suspended for the greater good. In this, she is just another hierarchical ruler—someone whose life ends up mattering more because she makes the call on which other lives matter at all. If she really wants to “break the wheel” that imparts power to such rulers, she’ll have to overcome doubters like Varys, who want a gentler emperor rather than her sitting on the same old throne.



This article contains major spoilers for Avengers: Endgame.

Steve Rogers had a date. In 2011’s Captain America: The First Avenger, his introduction into the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Chris Evans’s titular super-soldier promised to take Peggy Carter (Hayley Atwell) dancing. It’s a promise he couldn’t keep: To save the world, he crashed into the Arctic and stayed frozen for nearly 70 years. When he woke up and learned of his new reality, he wasn’t relieved to be alive; he was regretful. There in the middle of 21st-century Times Square, his first thought wasn’t of this modern world; it was of that missed date.

It should come as no surprise, then, that in his final scenes in Avengers: Endgame—spoilers incoming—Cap seeks out Peggy. After spending most of the film leading the reassembled Avengers in search of the Infinity Stones to defeat Thanos (Josh Brolin), Cap wraps up his last mission—by taking some personal time. He travels back to the ’40s, goes on that date, builds the relationship both of them had been denied, and lives the married life. When he appears again in the present, he’s an old man who offers Sam (Anthony Mackie) a self-deprecating explanation involving Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr.): “I thought, Maybe I should try some of that life Tony was telling me to get.”

Maybe that was it. Or maybe he was only following Peggy’s orders. When Steve met the aging Peggy in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, she left him with a piece of advice: “All we can do is our best, and sometimes the best that we can do is to start over.”

Yet the Endgame finale—with its heart-stoppingly romantic last shot, of Steve and Peggy dancing in their living room, reunited sometime in the past—has made Captain America a target of some less-than-Cap-friendly commentary since the film’s release. His final scene, one critic argued, “makes no sense.” On Twitter, he’s #notmysteve and #notmycaptain, with the word selfish brought up the most.

To many, apparently, starting over is the worst way for Steve Rogers’s story to come to an end. For one thing, the time-travel mechanics are too tricky: Does Cap’s return to the past mean he erased Peggy’s original one, which included—as shown in Winter Soldier—a family? Isn’t that morally wrong? (Not if you buy the directors Joe and Anthony Russo’s explanation: They say that Cap created an alternate reality and found Peggy there.) For another, the choice feels out of character: Didn’t Cap promise his friend Bucky (Sebastian Stan) that he’d be with him until the end of the line? (Yes—and he’s already kept that promise more than enough times, through three different films. And again, according to the Russos, Bucky knew what Cap was about to do.) Most important, shouldn’t Cap, the righteous soldier, have gone out swinging in a battle, any battle, instead of solemnly sitting on a bench?

It’s a good thing Cap’s weapon of choice is a shield.

Not that he should need it. His decision should be celebrated for how satisfying it is; it’s Endgame’s most human exit compared with all the epic, sacrificial, and even otherworldly losses. Of the original Avengers, Black Widow (Scarlett Johansson) launches herself off a distant planet’s cliff for the Soul Stone (which can be retrieved only in exchange for, well, a soul). Iron Man dies on an apocalyptic battlefield to destroy Thanos. But those legendary finales happened because of their character evolutions: Black Widow, though her arc is never explored as deeply as those of her teammates, felt she had prior acts to atone for, while Iron Man had his transformation from playboy billionaire to chivalrous hero to complete.

Cap, though? As the paragon of duty, honor, and loyalty since his days as a frail army reject, he’s been a superhero long enough—so in his last moments, he returns to being just a kid from Brooklyn. His choice isn’t about being a quitter; it’s about finally getting to quit.

Besides, superheroes don’t usually get such tidy closure. Comic-book characters, Uncle Ben and the Waynes excepted, aren’t supposed to ever really die. It’s a classic trope: They get reborn as higher beings, resurrected as clones, experimented on and rebuilt, time-traveled into the present, moved from alternate Earths or realities to the one dominating the story. Endings are never endings, especially on-screen; they’re open-ended teasers. Superman perishes in the DC Extended Universe, then promptly reenters the narrative a few short scenes later. Jean Grey dies, only to come back with a vengeance—a feat she’s about to accomplish in theaters again. Thanos dusts off half of all species, yet here they are, right back where they left off.

How remarkable, then, that Avengers audiences get to watch a hero wrap up his story the way he wants to, by being as loyal as he’s always been and fulfilling a promise he once couldn’t keep. How refreshing that we get to have him be human, out of costume and out of action. How marvelous to see him retire, no post-credits sting necessary, having lived a full life with someone he missed ever since he woke up from those decades frozen in ice.

But if he’s still #notyourcaptain? Well, it’s not like Captain America’s going anywhere. That shield’s been bequeathed to Sam, who with Bucky toplines the Disney+ series Falcon & Winter Soldier. The Cap of Endgame, though, the one worthy enough to have wielded Mjolnir? This one got the ending he deserved. Yes, Cap could do this all day. But in the end, isn’t it simply nice that he doesn’t have to?



“You’re not in Jazzercise, ladies,” a trim, tattooed fitness instructor chided me and the roomful of women who were attempting to work up a sweat one morning a few months ago. I’d never done Jazzercise, but I knew what she meant. The caustic cue conjured grainy VHS tapes—the kind that circulate on social media for their Totally ’80s aesthetic—featuring a gyrating blonde who’s all limbs, leotard, and embarrassing exclamations like “Find that boogie body.” My instructor was calling us uncool.

Tempting as it may be to dismiss Jazzercise to the dustbin of fitness history, the dance-cardio program—which turns 50 this month—is more than a punch line. The format founded in a dance-studio basement by Judi Sheppard Missett, the front woman in the videos, established the style and substance of “boutique fitness,” the fastest-growing segment of today’s $26 billion fitness industry. Jazzercise set the standard not only for contemporary choreographed offerings, but also for the franchise model exemplified by the likes of Curves, Pure Barre, and Barry’s Bootcamp.

Perhaps most crucially, serving a female clientele when exercise was perceived as the domain of men, Jazzercise invited women to find the “joy” and “flair” in working out. The program challenged an enduring machismo that still limits women’s full participation in many exercise environments. The feel-good fitness language that Jazzercise birthed, however, blended newly empowering affirmations with old beauty directives that prized a thin and conventional sort of prettiness—a mixed ethos that pervades U.S. fitness culture today.

“We’re still here,” Missett reminds me when I ask about her career in the past tense during an interview. According to her forthcoming memoir, Building a Business With a Beat, Jazzercise has netted $2 billion in cumulative sales. Taught primarily in freestanding suburban centers or in community spaces such as churches and schools, Jazzercise is in every U.S. state and 25 other countries. At the height of its popularity, in the mid-1980s, Jazzercise was the second-fastest-growing franchise business in the country, after Domino’s Pizza.

In the 1960s, this future was unimaginable for many women. For most, the idea of “going to the gym” was uncommon, and the word exercise might call to mind the Presidential Fitness Challenge common in physical-education classes or muscle-bound bodybuilders. When Missett, then a recent Northwestern graduate, took a fitness test at her local YMCA, the employee puzzled over her results: The rubric had been conceived for a male physique, and Missett’s considerable strength defied his expectations, given that “all” she did was dance.

Back at Chicago’s prestigious Gus Giordano studio, where Missett taught dance, she noticed other obstacles to women becoming physically active. Mothers sat to the side as their young daughters practiced; the idea of grown women dancing for fitness, or fun, was unfamiliar. How, Missett wondered, could she design a class that allowed women to enjoy dancing with the same abandon as their uninhibited daughters? She soon got her answer. After she toned down the technique and turned the women away from the mirror, her adult classes filled. Jazzercise—first called Jazz Dance for Fun and Fitness—was born.

While exercise spaces for women existed at the time, they often assumed that women valued prettiness and poise over feeling powerful. As early as the 1930s, a Chicago “figure salon” invited women to “soothe the nerves and control the curves,” according to a 1936 piece in the Chicago Tribune. For decades, these businesses were largely owned by men, whose rationale for sex segregation—such as having “ladies’ days” at the bodybuilder Vic Tanny’s chain of clubs—was more about maintaining proper distance between the sexes than enabling women to freely enjoy exercise.

But ideas about women’s bodies and who should have agency over them, at the gym and elsewhere, were changing. New research touted the benefits of aerobic exertion, expanding the popular understanding of exercise to include arenas outside of smelly weight rooms. Many proponents of women’s liberation sought to obliterate old ideas about female frailty and celebrated what women’s bodies could do, whether breastfeeding or playing basketball. Along with Missett, women such as Jacki Sorensen, who developed the competing “aerobic dancing,” and Lydia Bach, who imported Lotte Berk’s barre workout from London, infused this philosophy into exercise.

Jazzercise, with its mostly female clientele and high-energy vibe, was of this moment that Missett seized and helped shape. Her family relocated to San Diego in 1972, where a body-conscious health culture was kicking up. Military wives packed Missett’s classes, which she said she taught so frequently that she nearly permanently lost her voice. When her students’ husbands were reassigned, many of these women were so heartbroken imagining life without Jazzercise that Missett created an official certification program, and then a franchise system, turning exercise into employment for thousands of women and creating global brand ambassadors before such a term existed.

Thousands of letters Missett has saved relay how Jazzercise moved women not only to lose inches, but also, in some cases, to leave abusive husbands, demand raises, and generally find joy in their bodies and lives. Jazzercise’s empowerment effect could be especially intense, because enjoying classes could become a career (more than 90 percent of franchisees begin as students; even more are women). I’ve interviewed women whose first solo travel, in their 30s, was to a Jazzercise convention. They found in the franchise a rare opportunity for employment and camaraderie that fit in with the demands of child-rearing. Missett relishes such stories of how Jazzercise has enabled women’s economic independence, including her own: She gleefully recounts a triumph in 1975 over a sexist Parks and Rec bureaucrat who balked at writing a big paycheck to a “little exercise girl.”

Three years later, Missett released her first book, which mostly offered advice on exercises and apparel. By contrast, Missett’s new memoir nods to history more than most other business, or fitness, books. She cites the 1974 Equal Credit Opportunity Act as crucial context for the rise of Jazzercise. Outlawing discriminatory practices that had subjected women to the humiliation of bringing a man along to apply for credit, the measure enabled women to become entrepreneurs and consumers. And she liberally quotes famous figures such as Gloria Steinem and Madeleine Albright. Yet Missett doesn’t include any of the era’s feminist watersheds that were centrally about women claiming bodily autonomy. Title IX, Roe v. Wade, the Fat Underground’s manifesto that declared “YOU HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE!”—birthing the body-positive language so prevalent today, including in Jazzercise—they are all conspicuously absent.

“Those women marching in the streets,” Missett told me when we spoke in 2015, had little in common with the movement she simultaneously launched in studios. It’s true; Jazzercise and Jane Fonda are often lumped together, but politically, their respective origins in historically conservative San Diego and liberal Beverly Hills diverge. Fonda founded her own dance-aerobics program in 1979 to fund the leftist Campaign for Economic Democracy; her best-selling book connected exercise to causes such as environmentalism and overcoming oppressive beauty standards. Missett avoided politics and favored suburbs like one New Jersey community she described, in which a Presbyterian reverend at first balked at renting out his church to women in “body stockings.” In a recent interview, Missett acknowledged that many Jazzercisers were influenced by “hearing about other women who were stepping up and believing that they had some power over their own lives.” But these “ordinary women,” she explained, sought the “nonthreatening environment” of Jazzercise. They were “not necessarily changing the world, but they were changing their world.”

Four decades before SoulCycle, Missett unquestionably created new spaces for women to build strength, self-esteem, and economic independence. Yet this form of liberation could also conveniently keep women trim and graceful. Some critics say Jazzercise not only left dominant and disempowering beauty ideals intact, but also helped perpetuate them. As one woman told me of seeing Jazzercise on television as a child in the 1980s, “It was the first time I realized I was supposed to work on my body … to look how I don’t naturally.” It’s also hard to overlook how the women whose hustle Missett so admires in Building a Business With a Beat—for keeping fit and running a franchise amid the demands of homemaking and a husband’s career—deftly navigated a patriarchal system that remained fundamentally unchallenged, if more palatable, after a great workout.

I contemplated this a few weeks ago while pulsing through pliés at the behest of an energetic barre instructor in a REBEL GIRL top. “Abs in,” she chirped. “Bikini season’s coming!” The dissonance between her outfit and her encouragement highlights the limits of the rebellion that comes in a 10-class bundle, purchased at least partly in pursuit of a six-pack. This tension—between you-go-girl messaging and the stubborn fact that thin remains “in”—is ubiquitous in the overwhelmingly female fitness world that Jazzercise helped create.

“Well, I am thin and white,” Missett acknowledged when I relayed a frequent association with Jazzercise as “something for skinny white ladies.” But she resisted the characterization as unfair; just that morning she had taken her daughter’s class—Shanna Missett Nelson currently heads Jazzercise Inc.—and “there were all ages, from 20-somethings to 60-somethings, all sizes and shapes, and we had African American and Hispanic women, a Muslim woman.”0

The Jazzercise class I attended in Manhattan this spring, in a subterranean back room of an old-school weight-lifting gym, was exceptionally diverse in terms of age, race, and size, given that the archetypal boutique-fitness consumer is assumed to be thin and white. As we smiled and sweated, I also noticed none of the usual peacockery of high-end exercise: no expensive athleisure, sultry selfies, or jockeying for the front row. In contrast to the confusing and sometimes contradictory world of such classes—where an hour-long experience can tack between breathless exhilaration, genuine camaraderie, and Mean Girls–level body-policing—Jazzercise was, well, friendly.

I attributed this welcoming vibe to a group of women who seem to experience Jazzercise as more than a workout. My instructor, Alexandra Lance, was born into the brand: Her mother taught at a Jazzercise center throughout her pregnancy. In Beaumont, Texas, Lance was a Junior Jazzerciser—the kids’ version of the class—and babysat at the center before becoming certified herself. Molly Olsen, who owns the Jazzercise Flatiron franchise and who personally welcomed me to the class in which she herself participated, shared a similar experience in the Atlanta suburbs. Starting in elementary school, Olsen took her mother’s classes while saving up for certification. For five years, she taught with her mother, who recently retired after more than two decades.

“It’s not the most lucrative endeavor,” Olsen, who works as a law librarian, told me of Jazzercise. Lance agreed that “it’s just enough to make it worth it to get paid to work out versus paying to work out.” Yet both women relate to Jazzercise as something loftier than a side hustle. “I think I can speak for all Jazzercise instructors,” Lance said, “that we do it because we love it—not because of the money or fame or other perks of being a fitness instructor.”

Boutique fitness is successful among women for many reasons, but “me time”—or in today’s argot, “self-care”—is unquestionably one. Missett was early to appreciate the attractiveness of the proposition to women who expended so much energy on others to focus, for an hour, on themselves. That’s why child care has long been a fixture at Jazzercise; it’s also why Olsen and Lance associate teaching and taking Jazzercise with carrying on a tradition, or in business-speak, why the brand is “sticky.” As boutique fitness has gone high-end, however, sleek studios are more likely to offer blowouts than babysitting. Arguably, such choices are designed to safeguard these spaces—and justify their prices—as temples of self-care, but a lack of child care also creates yet another obstacle to participating in an exercise culture rightly criticized as elitist.

Elitist but expansive, that is. Today, C-suite executives socialize in spin class, fitness studios are strip-mall staples, and bachelorette parties include cardio-dancing before carousing. This world has been shaped by the core elements of Jazzercise: community through choreographed fitness. Technically and economically accessible programming, in franchise form. An undeniably pro-woman, if less certainly feminist, message. Ironically, the brand’s biggest obstacle remains overcoming its own success. Despite integrating intervals and strength training, to many, Jazzercise still evokes the leotards and leg warmers of its heyday. Yet, “if we were what we were 40 years ago,” Missett insisted, “we wouldn’t still be here. We are always changing.”



The rapper Rico Nasty begins her latest project, Anger Management, with a scream. For fans of the eclectic Maryland-raised artist, that yell conjures a feeling akin to the pleasant stomach churn of a roller-coaster climb: When Rico shouts “KENNY!,” the name of her longtime producer, you know electrifying chaos is about to ensue.

Rico metabolizes life’s frustrations by raging about them—and invites her audience to do the same. Anger Management is Rico’s first tape released entirely as a collaborative project with the DJ and producer Kenny Beats, but the two have already established a signature sound, one that spans a wide range of influences, particularly punk and heavy metal. The 21-year-old rapper has been a prolific musician since she was in high school, and her work showcases not just her own tremendous range but also the limitless sonic possibility within rap as a genre: For every subdued “Sugar Trap,” there’s an amped-up “Smack a Bitch.”
Kenny helped shape two of the defining tracks of Rico’s massively successful 2018 tape, Nasty. Both “Rage” and “Trust Issues” are metal-inflected anthems of suspicion and fury, and Kenny’s production lends Rico’s missives an eerie, knocking quality. The rapper channels her anger with a menacing wail, her throat scratching and her face often contorting when she performs. Anyone who’s seen her live can attest to her dynamism onstage; Rico’s energy is contagious, and her concerts feel like one giant mosh pit. When the rapper shouts that she loves “bad bitches who be ragin’,” it’s hard not to believe her.

Anger Management’s greatest thrill is how seamlessly it continues the trajectory of Nasty without sounding gimmicky. The new Kenny Beats collaboration is a compact project: nine tracks in just 18 minutes. But it’s packed with a broad array of musical flourishes, clever wordplay, and cross-medium samples. And, fittingly, there’s no shortage of rage-fueled bangers: It’s the kind of tape that makes you feel as if you can run through a wall.
On the first track, “Cold,” Rico is characteristically weary—“It be the same thing, just on a different day”—and confident: “She can try but she don’t compete / When I pull up, you know it’s me / Ain’t none of these bitches cold as me / Cross you just like a rosary.” On “Big Titties,” she brags about the notoriously raucous energy of her shows, where she’s almost always “signin’ on some”—well—“big titties.”

Anger Management finds the irreverent artist, who grew an early fanbase with tracks named for the shows “Hey Arnold” and “iCarly,” sampling a very different television series. “Cheat Code” (featuring the “Harlem Shake” producer Baauer) begins with a quote from the VH1 reality series Love & Hip Hop: Atlanta that will be immediately recognizable to the show’s largely black audience. (The scene it’s from quickly turned into a ubiquitous meme.) Then the beat drops suddenly and Rico raps over a ricochet of percussion: “People keep tryna test my gangster / Pull up on your block with a mask like Jason.” As the song progresses with a symphony of screams, she sounds equal parts charming and terrifying.





Born Maria Kelly to a Puerto Rican mother and an African American father, Rico drew her stage name from a moment of teenage hostility. The artist, who in high school frequently wore a lanyard around her neck that read Puerto Rico, changed her Instagram name to “Rico Nasty” after a boy shouted the phrase at her in an attempt to comment on her body odor. It’s that kind of audacious response to adversity that animates much of her music and makes her raps so compelling.

Rico’s rage is multidirectional and genre-bending: On Anger Management, she takes aim at her own haters, to be sure, but also at others, including a certain Trump-supporting athlete (“Take the air out you, Tom Brady”). And “Hatin,” which samples Jay-Z’s braggadocious “Dirt Off Your Shoulder,” is perhaps the record’s most direct dismissal of sneering men. Rico is, after all, one of still-too-few prominent women in the stubbornly male-dominated rap industry. So on “Hatin,” she flips Jay’s hook and addresses her female listeners directly: “If you got your own shit, you ain’t ever gotta listen to him, girl / Niggas be hatin’ on bitches.”
Rico raps with the kind of force—and regards her fans with the kind of enthusiasm—that invites listeners to imagine themselves wielding her lyrics, not targeted by them. Her music lends itself to any number of pump-up situations, such as strenuous workouts or pre-party dances in front of the mirror.

The artist’s openness and raw emotionality make her moments of triumph all the more satisfying to hear. On “Cheat Code,” for example, she tracks her success using amusingly specific metrics of luxury: “No more motel, eatin’ on oxtail.” How gloriously serene.



You will probably enjoy A Discovery of Witches if you enjoyed, for instance, Outlander. Or Fifty Shades of Grey. Or the Harry Potter franchise. Or Romeo and Juliet. Or old episodes of Inspector Morse on PBS. Or Underworld. Or that enchanting imported show on the network no one can ever find in which Matthew Goode and Matthew Rhys travel the world being handsome and drinking wine. There is, to say, a lot going on. Some of it is very diverting, given that the location budget seems to have been approximately $10 trillion and the series is about witches and vampires who are all rather—how to put this politely—horny. But in other moments, when a woman has her third recurring dream about spiders, or when someone says, without a tinge of self-awareness, “She’ll be sleeping in my tower,” you might have to decide how far your personal tolerance for irony-devoid supernatural travel porn extends.

It is surprising, in a good way, that A Discovery of Witches arrived on Sunday on BBC America and AMC, that purveyor of gruesome zombies, difficult men, and a scowling Pierce Brosnan in a nubby vest and a 10-gallon hat. The adaptation of Deborah Harkness’s All Souls fantasy series first aired in the U.K. on Sky One, before heading to the streaming services Sundance Now and Shudder, where it smashed Sundance Now’s previous viewing records. Following that success, as well as AMC’s decision to air Killing Eve’s second season simultaneously with BBC America, Kate Brooke’s supernatural drama has been drafted to join the lineup on both networks.

Teresa Palmer plays Diana, an American academic and historian who’s a visiting research fellow at Oxford, giving cursory lectures on her specialist subject, alchemy; exercising a lot; and wearing pantsuits to the university library, the Bodleian. The library is where, after she requests a book one day, something strange happens—there’s an odd whoosh-y sound, Diana begins to see text moving through previously empty pages, and she suddenly develops an ugly red scar on the palm of her hand. Moreover, lots of people in Oxford suddenly seem to have been alerted to her presence, including Matthew (Matthew Goode), a biologist with an extraordinary sense of smell and some unconventional eating habits.

Matthew is, indubitably, an Anglo-French Christian Grey. He appears to own several castles, one of which has actual peacocks on its lawn. He drinks wine and finds notes of blackberry, cigar smoke, and red currants in brandy (nonbrandied red currants not being specific enough). He stalks Diana, rather unappealingly, for the first few episodes, and at one point sniffs her discarded gym clothes before his face contorts into a disturbing grimace. He can run so fast that he becomes a blur, a skill he utilizes to hunt and eat deer in the Scottish highlands. Matthew is, in other words, a vampire. And Diana is, unbeknown to her, a witch who’s only now coming into her consequential powers.

In the world of A Discovery of Witches, vampires and witches walk the Earth as enemies, but have dwindled in number and power over the centuries. (There are also demons, but the series doesn’t seem to care about them or explain what they do other than break impasses when supernatural representatives congregate.) Diana and Matthew, two members of factions that have fought for virtually as long as they’ve coexisted, are inexorably forbidden to fraternize, let alone fall heavily for each other, but neither seems remotely deterred by this. Matthew craves Diana, both in the romantic sense and—it’s his nature—as a snack. Diana craves Matthew, too, and while she isn’t hungry for his blood, nor is she underwhelmed by the state of his tower.

A Discovery of Witches just looks expensive. It’s as gorgeously shot and cinematic as a Bond movie, sweeping over the spires and cobbled streets of Oxford, the azure canals of Venice, and the various stately homes and ancestral châteaus that Matthew calls home (when you’ve been alive for more than a thousand years, the series hints, you acquire an extreme amount of real estate). As far as TV series go, it’s hopelessly unsubtle, in one episode scoring a scene featuring demons with the Imagine Dragons song “Demons.” The dialogue is frequently painful, although it’s hard to say whether it’s more or less bearable than Matthew’s habit of name-dropping historical figures like Charles Darwin and Machiavelli. “Did you … survive the fall of Carthage?” an awestruck Diana asks. “Which fall of Carthage?” Matthew smirks back.

As Matthew, Goode is clearly here to have a good time, scowling and sniffing and shooting Palmer’s Diana so many hot looks that you worry her hair might catch fire. Vampires, he tells her, are “efficient. Our bodies don’t use up much energy, so we have an awful lot to draw upon when we need to.” (Hello.) Palmer has the trickier role with Diana. She’s essentially playing the central figure in a Harlequin romance, who’s also a tenured professor at Yale, and the script bolsters one of those elements much more heavily than the other. It’s hard to get a sense of Diana’s discombobulation, or her tragic history, or her academic prowess, especially when the show zips so briskly through fragments of one of her lectures that it might as well be saying blah blah blah.

Nor are the supporting characters given much to inhabit beyond complicating—or stoking, as the scene might require—the scorching passion between aristocratic English vamp and educated American witch. Lindsay Duncan plays Matthew’s mother, a terrifying tartar. Alex Kingston is Diana’s aunt, a witch living in Madison County, New York. Trevor Eve is a particularly scary vampire who keeps mysterious talking heads in locked closets. Louise Brealey plays a witch who hovers nervously in different locations. The rising actor Edward Bluemel is Matthew’s “son.”

Over eight episodes, A Discovery of Witches knows what it is supposed to do, and it does it fairly well. It has its own parlance (nonvampires are dismissively referred to as “warmbloods”), its stunning vistas of rural French hills and yachts covered in polished teak, and its central story of forbidden love, defined by a dynamic that I can only describe as sexy-sexy sex. Might you grimace slightly when the camera focuses on Diana reading a web page with a header blaring “Feeding Habits of Wolves,” or feel a flutter of a cringe when Matthew murmurs about candied violets ruining Elizabeth Tudor’s teeth? Sure. But Matthew and Diana are, at least, equals, and that fact alone sets A Discovery of Witches apart from other contenders to its genteel-but-sensual-otherworldly-drama crown.



This word, empowerment—I don’t think it means what The Handmaid’s Tale thinks it means. Since it debuted in 2017, just a few months into Donald Trump’s administration, the Hulu series has toggled awkwardly between modes. This is a show about ritualized sexual and physical assault, set amid a fundamentalist-Christian theocracy that has stripped women of all basic human rights. But it’s also a show that can’t stop framing June (played by Elisabeth Moss) as a grand feminist icon, a nascent slayer of the patriarchy and purveyor of infinite slow rage-gazes at the camera. With jangly “girl power” musical cues (Lesley Gore’s “You Don’t Own Me” scans strangely in a world where women are assigned to men as property) and the defiant mantras June recites in her head, The Handmaid’s Tale keeps insisting that its story is an empowering one. The commanders of Gilead, June thinks at the end of Season 1, “should never have given us uniforms if they didn’t want us to be an army,” a nugget so quotable, it was tweeted out as fan art by the verified account @HandmaidsOnHulu.

Real empowerment, though, isn’t the storytelling equivalent of a branded tote bag bearing the words Burn. It. Down. It isn’t endless close-ups on June’s face, her eyes blazing rebellion because surliness is the only dissent she can manifest that won’t get her killed and fed to livestock. Empowerment isn’t making another woman a kicky green-leather sling to accessorize her amputated finger. And, most crucially, empowerment isn’t the same thing as brazen stupidity. In the final moments of Season 2—a 13-episode stretch that invested heavily in portraying the violence and brutality of Gilead—the show asked viewers to believe that June, set up for escape with her baby, would decide to stay instead and fight the regime from within. For me, it was maddening. Not only because it was such a conspicuous example of narrative problem-solving, but also because it so neatly encapsulated the paradox of The Handmaid’s Tale: The series continually asserts how empowering it can be, straining all the while to keep its central character in complete subjugation.

Season 3 of the show, the first three episodes of which arrive on Hulu today, was delayed sufficiently that it missed the cutoff for Emmy eligibility, a decision that Hulu’s Craig Erwich stressed was about maintaining the quality of the series. Visually, The Handmaid’s Tale is as striking as ever, maintaining the chilling beauty of Gilead’s optics—the curated flecks of handmaid red on stark white snow and the strange symmetry of ceremonial events. Story-wise, though, it’s blotchy as hell. If you were enraged by June’s decision to ship her baby off to Canada without her, you won’t be mollified in the opening moments of Season 3, when she justifies it by thinking breezily, There are always reasons. I’m sorry, baby girl. Mom’s got work. To be clear, this is state-sanctified rape and torture she’s talking about returning to, not late nights at the office.

Put aside the clumsy feminist overtures for a moment. The Handmaid’s Tale, in Season 3, is as narratively inert as it was in its earliest episodes, which at least did the necessary work of establishing Gilead’s universe. June, supposedly a smart and intuitive woman, repeats the same mistakes she’s made several times in the previous seasons. Mostly, these involve trusting Serena Waterford (Yvonne Strahovski), a character who previously held June down while Fred Waterford (Joseph Fiennes) raped her. But Serena isn’t the only character who vacillates between sympathetic and monstrous in the blink of an eye: The enigmatic Commander Joseph Lawrence (Bradley Whitford), last seen helping Emily (Alexis Bledel) escape with June’s baby, swings back into (complicated) antagonism after that act of charity. Aunt Lydia (Ann Dowd), wounded by Emily and thus more dangerous than ever, doles out electric shocks with a cattle prod in some scenes and teary maternal hugs in others. Even the person June trusts the most in Gilead seems to be getting set up as a villain.

The pacing of the first six episodes is tedious, as the plot picks its way ploddingly toward a new locale while circling through old conflicts and tensions. Janine, played by Madeline Brewer, is still prone to erratic outbursts that put her at risk; June still periodically finds herself being escorted into ominous vans without any sense of whether she’s going to her death or the drugstore. In lieu of character development for June, the camera returns to her in close-up over and over, zooming in on Moss’s visage with all the commitment of a dedicated Hollywood facialist. And the writing, liberated since Season 2 from Margaret Atwood’s elegantly spare source material, is all over the place, meaning that June gets ponderous inner monologues comparing herself to trees, but also sporadically clunky outbursts. (Which handmaids, she wonders in one scene, might be compelled to “burn this shit place to the ground”?)

Even more disorienting, though, is the show’s complete lack of consistency when it comes to Gilead itself. It’s either a police state or it’s not; it can’t be both a brutally efficient disciplinary environment and a world in which June has the freedom to enter any room she pleases, smoke conspiratorial cigarettes with Serena, and kiss her baby’s father, bareheaded, outside the home of an impossibly powerful (and well-guarded) leader of Gilead. Moss, who’s charged with selling June both as an impuissant figure of roiling resentment and as a plucky member of the underground, tries valiantly to reconcile these two disparate roles, but she’s boxed in by every bad decision the writers force June to make.

In some ways, The Handmaid’s Tale feels like it’s suffered from its uncanny timing over the past two seasons rather than benefited from it. Here we are, in this entirely strange moment when feminism is more culturally popular than ever and women’s bodily autonomy more gravely imperiled than it has been since the ’70s; and here Bruce Miller’s series is, an adaptation of a novel about a regime so repressive that it reduces women to hooded wombs. It’s a TV show about children being forcibly taken from their mother, coinciding with a presidential administration that forcibly takes children from their mother. It’s a drama that frequently and unabashedly uses the word resistance. But it’s also a series that scooped up so many awards during its debut season, and so much critical praise, that Hulu seems unlikely to let it start wrapping up any time soon. Hence the catch: Empowerment is crackling through the zeitgeist, and The Handmaid’s Tale wants to deliver it, but its continuation also depends on June being a prisoner of Gilead for a good while longer.

This inertia is frustrating, because when the show breaks out of its self-imposed loops, it’s extraordinarily moving. Without spoiling too much, there are developments this season involving Bledel’s Emily and O. T. Fagbenle’s Luke that left me in emotional shreds, enabled by both actors doing astonishing work. Miller and his writers are demonstrably gifted at imagining the aftermath of surviving Gilead and portraying it with thoughtfulness and sensitivity. These are the kinds of stories that resonate, characterized by responses to trauma that ring acutely true. But June—trapped in her sequence of shock, rebellion, rinse, repeat—doesn’t feel like a person anymore. She’s the empty embodiment of female rage, perpetually denied meaningful release. And that’s a hard thing, in this moment, to keep on watching.



The new Amazon/BBC miniseries Good Omens is essentially six hours of the same joke, and that joke is the universe itself. Or—more precisely—the chronic absurdity of heaven, hell, and everything that falls in between. Adapted by Neil Gaiman from the book he co-wrote more than 30 years ago with the late fantasy novelist Terry Pratchett, Good Omens is an ongoing battle not between good and evil but between the profound and the ridiculous. It’s the literary technique of bathos, turned into television. Walking into a London bookshop in one scene, the archangel Sandalphon (played by Paul Chahidi) wrinkles his nose, saying, “Something smells … evil.” The angel Aziraphale (Michael Sheen) flinches for a moment, relaxes, and replies, “That’ll be the Jeffrey Archer books, I’m afraid.”

Your own personal appreciation for Good Omens might hinge on whether you find jokes like these to be impossibly delightful or exceedingly indigestible. (“I’m here spreading foment,” the demon, Crowley, played by David Tennant, tells Aziraphale during one flashback to the Middle Ages. “What is that, some kind of porridge?” Aziraphale responds.) Irreverence is baked into the book’s conceit as a comic chronicle of the end of days and the collaborative efforts of an angel and a demon to prevent the demise of all humanity. This is Genesis meets the British children’s series Just William; a rollicking tale of Armageddon that makes infinite time for tea and crumpets. As writers, both Gaiman and Pratchett have the kind of mind that can imagine the world, if not in a grain of sand, then in a cellophane-wrapped sherbet lemon.

In Good Omens, Gaiman’s creativity seems almost entirely unfettered—by possibility, by structure, or by budgets. This is a series that’s narrated by God herself (voiced by Frances McDormand), and whose opening sequence features an animated explanation of the creation of the world (those fossilized dinosaurs are apparently a big joke that paleontologists haven’t gotten yet). It’s outside the Garden of Eden that Crowley—or Crawly, since he was recently tempting Eve in serpentine form—meets Aziraphale for the first time. One is a swaggering, cocksure soldier of Satan with moves like Jagger and yellow snake eyes. The other is an angel in the mold of a slightly prissy librarian, generous of heart but prone to vanity and epicurism. They hit it off almost immediately.

The dynamic between Tennant’s Crowley and Sheen’s Aziraphale is what makes Good Omens, which in its finest moments feels like a gay-ish, biblical When Harry Met Sally. The third episode’s pre-credits sequence, which runs a stonking 30 minutes long, details the encounters the pair have had over the years: an early run-in as Noah is constructing his ark, a meet-cute at the Crucifixion, a rendezvous during the French Revolution. It’s in foggy Arthurian England that they finally figure out why they’re always in the same place at the same time, each trying to shift the balance of good and evil on Earth during pivotal historic moments, and only canceling out each other’s efforts.

So they form an agreement of sorts that lasts for 6,000 years, until the moment when the anti-Christ threatens to precipitate the final battle between heaven and hell that ends all life on Earth. But there’s been a complicated kind of switcheroo that means the child everyone thinks is the son of Satan is just a surly tweenager with affluenza, while the actual anti-Christ has been raised for the past 11 years by an unremarkable couple in the rural village of Lower Tadfield. There’s also a witch, Anathema Device (Adria Arjona); a witch-hunter (Michael McKean); an affable nerd who destroys every piece of technology he touches (Jack Whitehall); the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse; and a Metatron (voiced by Derek Jacobi). Jon Hamm plays the archangel Gabriel, a preening, violet-eyed CEO with a joyless smile and a tight cream turtleneck.

It’s a kind of storytelling so maximal that the same 57-minute episode can contain a tangential alien invasion and a physics lesson explaining how angels and demons can shrink and grow in size (featuring multiple Sheens dancing the gavotte and multiple Tennants getting down to disco). The blessing of the streaming-TV era is that Gaiman seems to have been given the go-ahead to manifest literally anything; the curse is that the story itself is better suited to a two-hour movie than a meandering six-hour trip through time and space. It takes an awful lot to make Armageddon feel anticlimactic, and yet, after the travails everyone in Good Omens has endured through millennia, things conclude with what feels awfully like a whimper. Even the Four Horsemen, whose actors include Mireille Enos and Brian Cox, can’t live up to the hype that precedes them.

For a story about the actual end of the world, the stakes slump casually on the ground among the mortals. Good Omens is frivolous in tone to the point of being glib, while its recurring jokes recur so often that they run out their welcome (Crowley gets scenes scored to virtually every track in the Queen songbook, while Aziraphale’s story lines frequently feature his obsession with eating). What sets the series apart is the relationship between two polar opposites who end up realizing, as the best antagonists do, that they’re not that different after all. The funniest moments in their history—such as Crowley hopping over consecrated ground to save his friend like a person walking barefoot on hot sand—are also the most endearing. If everything else feels decidedly extraneous, it’s mostly worth it to see two such estimable actors having such a lovely doomsday.



Editor's Note: This article is one in a series of responses to Elizabeth Winkler’s article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?,” in the June issue of the magazine.

I’m not convinced that Emilia Bassano or anyone else was the true author of Shakespeare’s plays. But I’m absolutely certain that women had a hand in the writing of many plays performed in his theater. Recent scholarship has demonstrated that women were actively and visibly engaged in the business of the professional theater companies that burgeoned during the Elizabethan period. Aristocratic and royal women were among their patrons, and women lower on the social scale were involved in their day-to-day business. Women supplied costumes for theatrical productions, lent money to the players, and owned shares in the companies. They stood at the entrances of playhouses to collect admission fees. Women also constituted a sizable portion of the playgoers—perhaps more than half—and on a few occasions, they even appeared onstage. (There are contemporary references to French actresses and female Italian acrobats, and Mary Frith—a figure in the London underworld, also known as Moll Cutpurse—delivered a notorious performance at the Fortune Theatre in 1612.) The female audience came from all ranks of society, ranging from royalty to common criminals. Perhaps the greatest number came from London’s middling class.

We know the names of medieval and Renaissance Englishwomen who wrote a variety of plays, ranging from liturgical drama to aristocratic and royal entertainments. The absence of women from the list of known commercial playwrights in Shakespeare’s England does not mean that no Englishwomen had a hand in writing for the public stage—only that their names may be difficult or impossible to retrieve. That is in part because most of the plays we have from the first commercial theaters came down to us without the names of their authors. The assumption that every one of the unnamed authors was a man is simply that—an assumption.

Eighty percent of extant plays printed in the 1580s lacked authorial attribution, and although the percentage of named playwrights increased significantly in subsequent years, it didn’t rise above half until after the beginning of the 17th century. Shakespeare’s contemporaries didn’t share modern audiences’ interest in the identification of authors. The recorded evidence scholars look for concerning the authorship of these early commercial plays may very well not exist because no one bothered to keep such records. Play scripts were originally conceived not as literary works but as theatrical resources. They were purchased, owned, and modified by the acting companies that regarded the scripts as items in their stock-in-trade—the raw material that, along with costumes, cauldrons, gunpowder, and other goods, the players used to put on their shows. Even in the case of a playwright as successful as Shakespeare, his name was not valued enough as a selling point to appear on the title pages of his published plays until relatively late in his career; the first two editions of Romeo and Juliet were published with no author’s name listed. In such a market, the gender of the writer who composed a script could easily have remained as unknown and unrecorded as his—or her—name.

It’s also important to remember that the scripts were typically the result of collaboration rather than the product of individual writers working in isolation. This is a mode of writing in which women were likely to be involved. Sixteenth-century English households were not simply domiciles; they were also places of production in which every resident—husband, wife, hired men and women, and children—had a part. The household of a baker produced bread; the household of a glover produced gloves. The household of a playwright is likely to have been organized on similar principles. The wives and daughters of practicing male playwrights could have learned the tricks of the trade close-up. Plays, like other goods sold as the property of a householder, could have been the product of his wife’s or daughter’s work as well as—or instead of—his own. And women who were not members of a playwriting household might have learned how to write for the players simply by attending their performances. Some of the sophisticated London women in the audience might have developed from savvy consumers into equally savvy writers of play scripts—perhaps especially skillful at producing material that would appeal to other women.

Renaissance descriptions of authors as “fathers,” puns on pen and penis, and comparisons of pens to weapons all helped establish a gendered boundary between women and writing. However, this rhetoric and the assumptions it expressed were more likely to have militated against the acknowledgment of a woman’s authorship than to have prevented her from writing plays that could be presented anonymously or identified as the work of a male collaborator. Numerous reasons, ranging from social propriety to commercial marketability, existed for concealing the fact that a woman had a hand in writing a play. As the examples of the Brontë sisters and George Eliot remind us, women continued to publish their work under men’s names into the 19th century. And even if a woman didn’t decide to conceal her authorship, it may have been concealed by those who appropriated, transcribed, or printed her work. For instance, The History of the Life, Reign, and Death of Edward II, now generally attributed to Elizabeth Cary, was published in 1680 as the work of her husband—an attribution that was not challenged until 1935.

Perhaps the most compelling evidence for the likelihood that women wrote for the early modern English commercial stage is the fact that those plays were not, in the first instance, written for self-expression or personal recognition. They were written, performed, and printed for profit. With money to be made and a marketable skill, women had powerful incentives to write plays that were presented either without authorial attribution or as the work of a male collaborator.

This essay has been adapted from Phyllis Rackin’s article “Anonymous Was a Woman,” in Shakespeare Without Boundaries.



Megan Thee Stallion only takes big swings. Late in 2017, at age 22, the artist recorded “Stalli Freestyle,” a video of herself rapping in the middle of a street somewhere in a suburb of her native Houston. The backdrop of her deceptively simple video was prosaic, but Megan’s performance electrified. Switching up her flow about halfway into the track, she unleashed a cheeky, rapid-fire missive that married braggadocio and pointed commentary: “Your favorite rapper only use onomatopoeias / You don’t wanna hear it cuz you only wanna see her / I’ma show you how a real rap bitch tee up / Get up in the booth and beat the motherfucking beat up.”

In the video, which has since racked up more than 2 million views on YouTube, she strutted around and danced with the confidence of someone who knew she’d be a star. And now, a year and a half later, the artist born Megan Pete has released her debut studio album under 300 Entertainment, the label responsible for the rapper Young Thug and the group Migos’s first two albums. For Megan, it’s also a kind of coronation.Fever continues the artistic dominance the inventive rapper has been establishing since even before “Stalli Freestyle.” Early videos of her freestyling over classic beats showcase a confident young artist, and by late 2017, she’d already put out a mixtape, Rich Ratchet, and an EP, Make It Hot. Last year was a catalytic one for Megan. While still a college student at Texas Southern University, she released Tina Snow, one of 2018’s best records. The EP was named for one of the alter-egos she inhabits: a female version of Tony Snow, the alias of the late Houston rap legend Pimp C. Bold, brash, and skillfully crafted, it introduced Megan as a rapper to be taken seriously.

“Big Ole Freak,” the breakout single from Tina Snow and the first of Megan’s songs to chart on the Billboard 100, is a prime example of her penchant for flipping male attention into a power of her own wielding. If much of the song is spent memorably extolling her prowess in bed, the second verse begins with a cocky admonition: “See, I’m a big ole freak, I love to talk my shit / And you must be a pussy boy, if you get offended.” Every line about Megan’s sexuality is a conditional promise; she might be offering a man pleasure, but the exchange must occur on her terms. Or, as she puts it, “I am the captain and he the lieutenant.”

The boastful single and its gloriously latex- and candy-filled video earned Megan a swell of attention earlier this year. Her social-media accounts, from which she excitedly shared countless videos of her fans dancing as they participated in her #BigOleFreakChallenge, also played host to an impressive series of her own freestyle videos filmed in her day-to-day life and during press appearances.

One of them, shot during a March installment of the Charlie Sloth Rap Show’s Fire in the Booth segment, closes out Fever. “Running Up Freestyle” is a perfect encapsulation of Megan’s acuity and jocular self-awareness. Over a fast-paced electronic beat from her frequent production collaborator LilJuMadeDaBeat, Megan comes for her crown. But she doesn’t stop there. She also, for example, addresses male spectators who claimed earlier this year that a woman who looks like her couldn’t possibly love anime (as she’s said she does, with specific examples): “Got the moves like I’m Ryu / Yellow diamonds, Pikachu / When I switch my hair to blonde / I’m finna turn up like Goku.” The song, like many of her tracks, is peppered with Megan’s well-deployed interjections. When Megan Thee Stallion stretches out an “eww!” or “aye!” or “aah!,” it becomes a lyric of its own. (Watch out, Migos ad-libs.)

As her star has risen throughout 2019, it’s become obvious that Megan is one of the genre’s most talented female artists. To say as much is hardly controversial. But it’s also reductive; Megan’s music isn’t just exciting within that narrow framework. She’s talented, savvy, and hardworking, all without qualifiers. That her music, and that of so many other women in the industry, is evaluated along such a limited—and skewed—rubric is something Megan knows intimately. “Women have to be the best and then some. A man can get on a track and literally make two noises and be the G.O.A.T.,” she said in that same Vulture interview. “When you listen to a girl rap, she gotta have all the bars, all the flows, be melodic, she gotta look good. They expect so much of us, and I mean, I like to work, so I’ll do it.”

And she does—but not without sacrificing her signature ebullience. A perfectly timed pre-summer record, Fever is a 14-track testament to Megan’s oft-stated wish that her fans have as much fun as she does. The album introduces listeners to another one of her many characters, the party-loving Hot Girl Meg. (The rapper refers to her legion of fans as her “Hotties,” and often dubs her own activities and theirs “Real Hot Girl Shit.”) Indeed, Fever is packed with bouncy tracks that inspire—or, more accurately, insist upon—twerking. The Juicy J and Crazy Mike–produced “Dance” evokes the former’s 2012 strip-club mainstay, “Bandz A Make Her Dance.” And there’s the aptly titled “Ratchet,” which begins with a nod to one of Megan’s most infamous onstage activities: “Drinking Henny out the bottle.”

“Hood Rat Shit,” the album’s second track, opens by sampling a viral video from 2008, in which the 7-year-old Latarian Milton (who went on to become a small-time social-media star) infamously said he stole his grandmother’s SUV, because he “wanted to do hood rat stuff with my friends.” It’s a raucous start to a track on which Megan raps about maintaining her rebellious habits despite leaving the neighborhood where she was raised. Still, the track maintains a boisterous levity.

Though she’s been celebrated by and publicly supportive of many industry peers, especially women, Fever finds Megan tapping only two other artists for features: the young North Carolina rap phenom DaBaby and the Memphis rapper Juicy J, who also produced several tracks on the record. DaBaby is one of hip-hop’s rapidly rising stars, and Megan’s track with him, in particular, is a decadently southern pairing. (In recent months, she’s stolen the spotlight on tracks with newer artists such as Khalid and Young Nudy, as well as veteran rappers such as the D.C.-area fixture Wale. On Wale’s “Pole Dancer,” for example, Megan wrests away all attention within her first two lines: “He said, ‘I heard I love the best things in life come to you for free’ / I say ‘Baby, I know you ain’t never met no bitch like me.’”)

Elsewhere, Megan is as fierce and incisive as ever. The album’s first single, “Sex Talk,” is an ode to the pleasure she insists on from men. “Realer,” which she debuted Thursday, features a menacing combination of trap drums and pizzicato strings. Megan swings from shouting out industry all-stars such as the incarcerated City Girls rapper J.T. to reiterating her own post as hip-hop’s ascendant star in colorful language: “They put that check in my hand, now I’m killin’ ’em / Don’t wanna link with these bitches, ain’t feelin’ ’em / I’ll knock the shit out that bitch like a enema.” Regardless of whom Megan might be addressing, the track gives her listeners permission to imagine themselves hurling such bile at their own detractors. (“W.A.B.,” or “Weak Azz Bitch,” on which she issues a series of dismissive threats, is as much a pump-up anthem as it is a diss track.)
Megan’s more overlooked slow tracks, meanwhile, showcase the artist’s range. Tina Snow’s “Cognac Queen,” for example, was a celebration of the rapper’s brown-liquor-fueled moments of sensuality. Fever’s “Big Drank” and “Best You Ever Had” channel that same sultriness with no shortage of energetic production. Megan is, after all, from the city that birthed “chopped and screwed” remixes and shifted the national hip-hop landscape in the process. (The very first line of Tina Snow, on “WTF I Want,” was “First of all, I’m from Houston.”) Fever is an unmistakably Houstonian record, at turns syrupy without sacrificing the city’s trademark bounce.
More than anything, play the Pam Grier–inspired Fever and you’ll hear an artist who has been perfecting her craft since long before cameras were trained on her. Skip back to Tina Snow, Make It Hot, or Rich Ratchet, and you’ll find a musician honing her talent as she pays homage to her many influences—Pimp C, to be sure, but also Biggie, Three 6 Mafia, Trina, and Holly-Wood.



As the first anniversary of the Columbine High School shooting approached, a group of students, teachers, and parents addressed reporters at a forum organized by the local school district. Sue Petrone, who lost her 15-year-old son, Danny Rohrbough, in the suburban-Colorado massacre that took the lives of 12 students and a teacher on April 20, 1999, appealed to journalists to focus on the victims and to be sensitive to the wishes and needs of the survivors.

“[I] respectfully request that the media not broadcast any footage from April 20,” Petrone said. “That would be footage showing students running from the school, students on stretchers, and murdered students.” Finally, Petrone and the others asked that the killers’ names be omitted from anniversary coverage.

The requests were, to some extent, honored. Nearly a year into reporting on what the journalist Dave Cullen has described as the first televised school shooting, and hoping to repair a relationship damaged by factual errors and accusations of sensationalism, broadcast networks decided to pool their anniversary coverage. Reporters agreed to stay away from Columbine on April 20 and instead attended a pre-anniversary tour of the school and an invitation-only meeting with victims’ families. But some news editors and executives were willing to bend only so much. “I feel for the parents who don’t want those images shown on television,” a producer with ABC’s Good Morning America said in the 2003 documentary Covering Columbine, “but I think it will be impossible to do that, for any television outlet to tell what happened without showing what happened.”

A CNN vice president told the filmmakers, “As far as using the names of the people who committed the crime, to me, I understand why that bothers the folks who lost children there, but that just is not something I could go along with.”

Twenty years and more than 230 school shootings later, reporters and media consumers have plenty—in fact, too much—experience covering and sharing news about these tragedies. But balancing the demands of journalism, human curiosity, and the well-being of survivors remains a work in progress. Headlines such as “Does the Media Have a Problem With Coverage of Mass Shootings?” have a tendency to appear after these events, as do warnings to not let “voluntary restraint … cross the line into censorship,” as a USA Today editorial put it in 2015. Still, evidence suggests that coverage is improving, and every new shooting brings a fresh round of guidelines for interviewing survivors, identifying shooters, minimizing the risk of copycats, and using social media as a reporting tool.

Missing from much of this coverage, some journalists and media critics argue, is an emphasis on solutions journalism, and in particular substantive examinations into how mass shootings can be prevented. Last November, after a gunman killed 12 people and injured 18 more at a bar in Thousand Oaks, California, Lois Beckett, a reporter who covers gun violence for The Guardian, tweeted: “In the face of an increasing number of mass shootings, media outlets give intense coverage to the terror and the trauma of these events, but almost no coverage of solutions, including solutions ordinary people can use.” In another tweet, Beckett wrote, “I am sick of media outlets making a case for hopelessness and stalemate after the latest mass shooting. There are ways to prevent some of these shootings. But people don’t know about them because WE DON’T COVER THEM.”

An example of what Beckett was advocating for could be found following a January 2018 school shooting in Benton, Kentucky, in which the 15-year-old shooter reportedly used a handgun taken from his parents’ bedroom closet. The day after the shooting, the Ohio Valley ReSource, a journalism cooperative that covers Ohio, Kentucky, and West Virginia, published a story on child-access prevention laws, which hold gun owners liable should children access their firearms. The ReSource reported that the laws work in states that have them, and in some cases have reduced accidental gun deaths among children by as much as half. Kentucky, the ReSource noted, is not one of those states. Last August, The Washington Post followed up with an investigation into the enforcement of these laws.

Anniversaries present additional opportunities for media outlets to examine the role and influence of their coverage, but these often come at a cost to survivors. Even the most well-intentioned and journalistically sound stories can prove painful to people already feeling increased levels of anxiety. For many in the Columbine community, the days and weeks leading up to April 20 are especially difficult. The Columbine teacher Kiki Leyba and the former principal Frank DeAngelis have both reported crashing their cars in April, with DeAngelis having done so six times in the years following the shooting. “I always tell people that April is a hard month for me,” the Columbine teacher Paula Reed told NPR last year.

Linda Mauser, whose son Daniel died at Columbine, published a blog post following the shooting’s fifth anniversary in which she described the day as “a little tougher” than previous anniversaries because of the increased media coverage. “The media and the public has such a fascination with certain numbered anniversaries of events (especially 1, 5, 10, 20 … ),” Mauser wrote, “so I think we can expect there won’t be any significant media attention on Columbine again until the 10th anniversary … That’s a relief. We simply don’t like the painful reminders that come with the media attention.”

In Columbine, Cullen’s best-selling book on the shooting and its aftermath, the author writes that after the fifth anniversary, “many survivors began to think in terms of how many events were left to slog through. Only two remained now: the 10-year and the dedication of the memorial [in 2007]. Surely they wouldn’t have to come back in 20.”

No doubt, a similar hope surfaces every year in communities across the country, as survivors in places such as Parkland, Florida; Santa Fe, Texas; Roseburg, Oregon; Nickel Mines, Pennsylvania; and Newtown, Connecticut, brace for the first, second, fifth, 10th, or 15th anniversary of their own worst days. At the same time, in the best newsrooms, journalists remind themselves and others to “be careful to never turn away from other people’s grief, to never tune it out or grow numb to it,” as one columnist wrote earlier this year on the first anniversary of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting.

“There is today, tomorrow and 20 years from now,” Joe Samaha, who lost his daughter Reema in the 2007 shooting at Virginia Tech, told me in February 2018. “That’s some of the stuff that we thought about, that some of our families had the ability to think about: ‘What is going to happen to my brain 20 years from now?’ Let me tell you: It’s never the same, neither the heart nor the brain.”

Or, as Cullen quotes Linda Mauser as saying in Columbine: “When your child dies, it’s always recent.”



What is the opposite of inspiration? I refer not to a simple lack of inspiration, mind you, but to a quality antithetical to ingenuity and originality. Whatever that quality is—I presume there must be a word for it in German—The Hustle is brimming with it. The movie is not merely uninspired, but sub-inspired, de-inspired, anti-inspired. It feels at times like the consummation of some wicked dare.

Which is not to say that there are not worse movies out there. There are, alas, a great many. But The Hustle is a remake of a remake, and as such, is standing on the shoulders of two well-wrought predecessors: the solid 1964 comedy Bedtime Story and its excellent 1988 update, Dirty Rotten Scoundrels. The latter, in particular, is a classic of mismatched-buddy cinema, two protagonists who loathe yet admire each other in precise balance. That the current film takes such sturdy cinematic bones and uses them to build something so feeble is a true embarrassment.

In a nutshell, the story follows an upscale, cosmopolitan British con artist living in the fictional Riviera town of Beaumont-sur-Mer. The home turf of this consummate professional is invaded by a crass but talented amateur, clumsily attempting to ply the same illicit trade. The two compete, then join forces, then compete again, with the promise that the loser of their ultimate wager will depart the fertile hunting grounds of Beaumont-sur-Mer, never to return.

The first time, the tale involved David Niven, that avatar of Englishness, coping with the encroachment of an American GI, played, with a moderately successful stab at comedy, by Marlon Brando. Next, it was a sublime Michael Caine and a near-peak Steve Martin offering their own take on the transatlantic relationship. This time around, the twist—and, as best I can tell, the entire rationale for the film’s existence—is that the roles have been gender-swapped: Anne Hathaway plays Josephine, the urbane, sophisticated crook, and Rebel Wilson is Penny, her tackily provincial partner/nemesis, hailing from Down Under rather than across the pond.

Such XY-to-XX remakes/reboots have become a bit of a subgenre of late, notably with 2016’s Ghostbusters and last year’s Ocean’s 8. But for all the absurd uproar those films provoked, they at least did something with their underlying premise: a clever spritz of underestimated women here, an endearing dollop of female companionship there. The Hustle, by contrast—directed by Chris Addison and written by Jac Schaeffer—is a paint-by-numbers, scene-by-scene, and even line-by-line retelling of its more accomplished antecedents. Like Niven and Caine before her, Hathaway’s Josephine frets over her competition from Wilson’s relatively unaccomplished Penny by noting that even “a poacher who shoots at rabbits may scare big game away.”

On the occasions when The Hustle tries to play up its new gender dynamics, it falls flat on its face, often literally. Beginning with the obvious: Josephine is presented as regally gorgeous, and Penny as an overweight slob. There are repeated references to Penny’s extraordinary appetite, she spills food on herself when she’s not spilling it on Josephine, and she falls down—on her face, on her back, over a pommel horse—again and again and again. Her go-to con-artist move (even late in the film) is to rush into the lobby of a fancy hotel, shout “What are the signs of a stroke? I can’t feel my tits!” and then collapse. Beyond all reason, the filmmakers seem to believe we will find this hilarious.

Hathaway’s Josephine is, if anything, a greater problem. Neither Hathaway nor the filmmakers seem to have any idea of who she is supposed to be, in part because they mix together elements of both protagonists, the pristine European aristocrat and the American gigolo. That Josephine is never, not even for a moment, convincingly British doesn’t help. (An early scene, in which she plays a ditzy American—or, I guess more accurately, a refined Brit pretending to be a ditzy American—is too convincing for its own good.) But worse, she, like Penny, fulfills the very sexist stereotypes that this theoretically pro-women movie purports to undermine.

In another early scene, Josephine explains that she cons men out of their money because they deserve it for their treatment of women, and that the only other way to get the lucre would be to have sex with them, a practice for which she has obvious contempt. Yet when push comes to shove in her competition with Penny over a boyish tech billionaire (Alex Sharp), such qualms quickly fall by the wayside, in part due to her withering assessment of Penny’s physical charms. At a dance club, Josephine grinds her posterior against their mutual mark with a frictional intensity that threatens to ignite the building. She later shows up in his hotel room for an attempted sexual seduction of such ham-fisted desperation as to be actively anti-erotic.

But perhaps the most obvious way in which The Hustle departs from its forebears is the utter lack of chemistry between its stars. Caine and Martin in particular had an easy, likable groove: You felt both their cultural antipathy and their grudging mutual respect. Hathaway and Wilson, by contrast, seem almost to inhabit separate films, taking turns center stage but never genuinely sharing a scene, let alone elevating each other’s performances.

Plenty more complaints could be made about the movie—the humiliating cameo by Dean Norris as an imbecilic, cornpone Texan mark; the lame, down-to-the-smallest-detail reworking of Dirty Rotten Scoundrels’ last scene—but noting them all would be overkill. This is both a lousy remake and another in a stretch of mainstream movies that pretend to be feminist while being the precise opposite. It shoots at rabbits and misses everything.



It is strange, when you pause to think about it, that E. L. James is still out there being glowingly profiled as a transgressive, taboo-busting warrior for women’s desire, given that her fictional worlds position female characters somewhere between the saintly Dorothea Brooke and the wimple-wearing Maria von Trapp. Her women are blushing, impoverished virgins, pristine of heart and fragile of appetite; her men, meanwhile, are swaggering Lotharios whose wallets bulge even more conspicuously than their designer underwear. In James’s new book, The Mister, the hero is an English earl who’s also a model-slash-DJ-slash-photographer-slash-composer, and whose first page of interior monologue is a vainglorious ode to “mindless sex” and a “nameless fuck.” His name, if you can stomach it, is Maxim Trevelyan. And the ultimate object of his affections, the woman who will ensure the rake’s progress from libidinous playboy to loyal husband, is … his doe-eyed undocumented Albanian maid, Alessia Demachi.

It’s not just that The Mister is bad. It’s that it’s bad in ways that seem to cause the space-time continuum itself to wobble, slightly, as the words on the page rearrange themselves into kaleidoscopic fragments of repetition and product placement. There’s the simple conceit for the book: James has been compelled to write an erotic novel about a woman who’s been sex-trafficked. There are its gender dynamics, which assert, with the stuffiness of a 19th-century provost, that men can hump anything they please with gay abandon, while women should save themselves for their billionaire employers. (It’s not until page 401 of The Mister that Alessia musters the courage to look directly at Maxim’s penis, as if it’s a basilisk whose unfiltered gaze head-on will turn her to stone.)

Mostly, though, there’s the writing. I have, for my sins, read all three novels in James’s Fifty Shades trilogy, a series that took sadomasochism and remarketed it for Christian housewives shopping at Target, all hot-pink padded nylon restraints and branded nipple clamps. The one positive thing you can say about The Mister is that it steers (mostly) clear of BDSM, and so doesn’t misinform millions of readers about the dynamics of consent. Like Fifty Shades of Grey, though, it has an errant creepiness about it that’s defined by its strange loyalty to the male gaze. Christian Grey, to me, is a man’s idea of a romantic hero—a 27-year-old tech entrepreneur with planes and cars and helicopters instead of a personality, a squillionaire whose idea of sexual gratification incarnate is getting a woman to do exactly what he says. And The Mister is no different, really, in that its male characters have power and its female characters cook and clean.

At the beginning of the novel, Maxim is a 28-year-old aristocrat-playboy whose older brother has just died, meaning that he’s obliged, in English terms, to buck up and start fulfilling his role as heir to the Trevethick estate (vast swaths of land and country houses in Cornwall, Northumberland, and Oxfordshire). Maxim is annoyed that this interferes with his nocturnal schedule of playing Korean house music at nightclubs in Hoxton and using his side gig as a model to sleep with “hot, skinny women.” But then his regular maid, his “daily,” is replaced by Alessia, whose introduction jolts Maxim into an uncharacteristic pattern of celibacy and composing concertos on the piano. “I am cleaner, Mister,” Alessia whispers to him, “her eyes still downcast, and her eyelashes fanned out above her luminous cheeks.” “Yes,” Maxim thinks. “For a woman dressed in a nylon housecoat, she’s hot.”

Their relationship is crystallized by loaded looks over household chores, captured in paragraphs that are both breathy and unintentionally comical. Alessia, Maxim observes, “moves with such easy, sensuous grace; bending over the sofa, lithe, toned arms reaching out and delicate, long-fingered hands cupping the crumbs from the seat cushions and brushing them off.” Moving on, “with a deliberate and even pace, she works her way around the piano, buffing and polishing, her breathing becoming faster and harder with the exertion. It’s agonising. I close my eyes and imagine how I could elicit the same response from her.” Maxim is stupidly horny, but he’s also dully unimaginative: Alessia, he thinks, “irons with the same sensuous grace I noticed the other day [emphasis mine], in long, easy strokes.”

James’s signature quality as a writer is specificity. No wine can go unlisted—“tasty Italian Barolo,” “good Chablis,” “Château Haut-Brion.” She gives us internal monologues that have the breadth and emotional resonance of the white pages. “I understand why she’s emotional,” Maxim thinks in one moment. “What a day. If I’m astounded by today’s events, she must be overwhelmed. Completely overwhelmed. I think it’s best if I leave her alone to gather her thoughts. Besides, it’s late and I have to make some calls.” No errant thought or observation of Maxim’s is unworthy of inclusion. (“We pull into the Gordano Services on the M5 just after 10:00 pm. I’m hungry in spite of the cheese sandwich Magda made for me back in Brentford.”) This kind of indiscriminate detail explains why The Mister is more than 500 pages long, but what’s baffling is that despite this exhaustive access to the inner workings of Maxim’s mind, he’s as wooden and charmless as a sideboard (and if E. L. James were writing this, she’d tell you that the sideboard came from West Elm or Restoration Hardware, and that it was polished to a smooth, sexy, expensive-looking sheen).

Alessia, meanwhile, is a character so contradictory that she feels glued together out of pieces, like an alluring Edward Scissorhands. She’s a 23-year-old virgin who was raised to believe that women do what men say; she’s a virtuoso pianist with synesthesia who sees musical compositions in rainbow colors; she grew up learning English from HBO and Netflix, but she’s never had an alcoholic drink; she ran away when her father arranged her marriage to a local gangster. Her mother, to facilitate her escape, put Alessia on a bus to England, but she was kidnapped by traffickers who stole her passport and planned to force her into prostitution. It’s this last point that feels most glaringly ill-advised. James devotes a little time to the trauma Alessia still feels, having managed to get away, but this is not the kind of book that wants to delve into the machinations of how women are forced into sexual slavery, or the shadow economy in England that targets undocumented immigrants. Alessia’s past is mostly just a narrative device that enables James to plot complications and dramatic face-offs within her story.

Alessia’s escape also allows James to present Maxim as Alessia’s savior, a dynamic that rankles uncomfortably within the uneven framework of their relationship. “Fuck the dishes, baby,” he tells her brazenly, before dragging her off to bed. After Alessia has a nightmare, screaming in terror while remembering how the traffickers put a black plastic bag over her head, Maxim thinks, smirkingly, “Of course, I’d like to make her scream in a different way.” After their relationship deepens, and he invites her to live with him, she “draws a deep breath. ‘I will clean for you. And you will pay me,’” she tells him, an act that’s actually suggested as a bold feminist overture rather than Alessia continuing to position herself as subservient and unequal.

Even more than it’s offensive, though, The Mister is tedious. It’s laborious. James retains her capacity to write sex scenes that last thousands of words in a row, but not without including turns of phrase that make you, as the reader, want to bleach your own brain. Alessia’s moan, Maxim notes, “is soft and husky as her head falls into the palm of my hand. It’s music to my dick.” Later, “a shocked giggle bubbles up from her happy place.” Food porn takes on a whole new meaning when Maxim watches Alessia prepare dinner: “Her long slender fingers hold the knife as she slices open the baked potatoes, releasing wisps of steam. With her brow fixed in concentration, she spreads butter on them, and she stops to lick some melted butter from her index finger. My groin tightens.”

James is clearly—and self-confessedly—a fan of romance novels, and The Mister seems to evoke the formula of historical romances of yore, when men were strong and complicated (and rich), and women were delicate and soothing (and helpless). But the genre itself moved on a long time ago. Nora Roberts is writing books about female firefighters and hostage negotiators. The pervasive whiteness of romance is finally being challenged. Stories like The Mister, which seem to want to wrench female sexuality and status back into the realm of feudalism, have a long distance to go to catch up.



This article contains major spoilers for Avengers: Endgame.

When the Marvel Cinematic Universe first introduced Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow, it left no ambiguity as to what audiences were supposed to make of her. In the guise of a notary, with dark red hair undulating around a skintight white shirt buttoned sub-sternum, she instantly reduces both Tony Stark and Happy Hogan to peacocking putzes. Natasha Romanova was a former KGB assassin, a world-class martial artist, and (apparently) a gifted hacker, but in Iron Man 2, it was clear that she was first and foremost a sex object.

“Where’s she from?” Tony asks Pepper. “She is from legal, and she is potentially a very expensive sexual-harassment lawsuit if you keep ogling her like that,” Pepper replies. While they’re conversing, Black Widow disarms Happy in a mock fighting bout with her signature fighting move, gripping his neck between her thighs and squeezing tight. As Tony Googles her, an image of Romanova posing in black lingerie on a white fur rug pops up on-screen. After Black Widow walks away with her notarized documents, he offers his final verdict: “I want one.”

You could say that the MCU has come a long way, baby, since its ickier early iterations. (I winced rewatching Iron Man 2 recently when Tony encounters a journalist whom he slept with in the previous movie and Pepper bitchily remarks that “she did quite a spread on Tony last year.” “And she wrote a story as well,” Tony counters. Ba-dum-bum.) Though it would take another nine years for a movie focused on a female character to actually materialize, Marvel movies introduced, in the meantime, Valkyrie and Okoye and Shuri and Hela, women who were warriors, prodigies, death incarnate. Then they debuted Captain Marvel, possibly the most powerful superhero in the universe, and one blissfully unencumbered so far by any romantic distractions.

But with Black Widow, the MCU seemed stuck. She’d been conceived in a different time, when it was sufficient for women to be sidekicks and decoration. An era when the former Marvel CEO Ike “Mar-a-Lago Cabinet” Perlmutter could block Black Widow merchandise because he didn’t think girls’ toys would sell. Though Black Widow was an extraordinary fighter and a fearless Avenger, she seemed perpetually cast as a foil to the male superheroes, rather than being a compelling character in her own stead. And as Avengers: Endgame proved (significant spoilers ahead), not even in her final moments would Romanova get to be the star. Her death was an act of sacrifice for Jeremy Renner’s Hawkeye, one in which Black Widow instantly calculated that his wife and children made his life worth more than her own.

I loved Avengers: Endgame as much as the hundreds of millions of other people who saw it over the past few days, despite its inconsistencies, its loosey-goosey treatment of the consequences of time travel, and its entirely implausible presentation of how physically strong one gloveless purple meanie (to quote my colleague David Sims) can be. Still, I was shocked at how perfunctorily the MCU was able to dispatch its founding female character, even as it put Gwyneth Paltrow’s Pepper in an Iron Woman suit and let Tessa Thompson’s Valkyrie ride a winged horse. Was this really the best Marvel could do for Black Widow, a character who’s starred in the MCU for almost a decade? A fall off a cliff, followed by 30 screen seconds of gentle grief from the men who’d apparently loved her the most? (Her death, you’ll note, wasn’t even enough to shake the equanimity of Zen Hulk.)

Black Widow died as she lived: being manipulated by Marvel to add texture to male characters. Over the years, she was Tony Stark’s assistant (“Is that dirty enough for you?” Romanova purred after pouring him a martini), emphasizing the sleazier aspects of Iron Man’s decline due to palladium poisoning. She made Captain America kiss her in a shopping mall during The Winter Soldier to distract two nearby Hydra agents, an act that teased fans and made the steadfast Cap seem vulnerable. She had a long-standing, non-romantic, but only vaguely fleshed-out history with Hawkeye that was the latter’s only defining characteristic until his family showed up. And she had a nascent relationship with Bruce Banner, being the only Avenger who could manage to coax him out of Hulk mode with murmurs and hand-holding (although, as Endgame revealed, while Black Widow was left valiantly holding the band together after Thanos’s snapture, Hulk was getting ice-cream flavors named after himself and sourcing extra-giant cardigans).

There were other indignities over the years. In the first Avengers movie, Loki calls Black Widow a “mewling quim,” an archaic term for female genitalia that should be used only in games of Scrabble. To this date, more than 342,000 people have viewed a Quora question analyzing whether her breasts are real. In 2015, while hosting Saturday Night Live, Johansson gamely starred in a sketch mocking Marvel’s pusillanimity with female superheroes, imagining the Black Widow stand-alone film as a rom-com set in Manhattan.

That same year, in the middle of the Age of Ultron press tour, Chris Evans and Jeremy Renner memorably bonded during one interview by characterizing Romanova as a “slut” and a “whore.” While Evans, to his credit, apologized, Renner later went on Conan and doubled down. He was, he said, “talking about a fictional character and fictional behavior. But Conan, if you slept with four of the six Avengers, no matter how much fun you had, you’d be a slut. I’d be a slut.”

Renner’s comments, on the one hand, were baffling: They came as he was promoting a movie that clarified Hawkeye and Black Widow’s relationship, specifying that he was married with children, and that those same children called Romanova “Auntie Nat.” On the other, however, they crystallized the historic problem with Black Widow: Though she hadn’t, in actuality, slept with Iron Man or Cap or Hawkeye or Bruce, at least as far as was specified, she’d been bounced among them over the years as a vague love interest and a humanizing force. Within the world of the Avengers, she was always being written with the men around her foremost in mind.

Which is, perhaps, why Romanova had to die, and why the long-awaited Black Widow stand-alone movie will likely be a prequel. “It’s kind of hard to trust someone when you don’t know who that someone really is,” Captain America tells Black Widow in The Winter Soldier. “Who do you want me to be?” she replies. With the men of the MCU around, writers never seemed willing—or able—to shape Black Widow in her own image. Without them, she might actually get to emerge as a character in her own right.



In 1959, Lee Krasner was in crisis. She was still mourning her husband—who’d died in a car crash three years earlier—when her mother died, compounding her grief. An exhibition of her work planned by the critic Clement Greenberg had been canceled when Greenberg decided he didn’t appreciate her newer paintings. Plagued by insomnia, Krasner began painting at night in her husband’s old studio, and since she disliked working with color under artificial light, she used only shades of umber and white.

The paintings Krasner made during this period, described by her friend Richard Howard as her “Night Journeys,” are extraordinary. The confinement of her color palette is coupled with a wild range of motion and space, in works that erupt with feeling. The Eye Is the First Circle, completed in 1960 and named after an Emerson quote, is a tempest that engulfs the viewer in chaotic, feathery strokes, a 16-foot-wide sweep of circular emotion. Krasner’s grief, her rage, her power, are all contained within the canvas, layered in jagged streaks of dark brown and daubs of white. Her state of mind is locked in paint, but seeps outward.

Lee Krasner: Living Colour, an exhibition currently on display at London’s Barbican Centre, is the first major European presentation of Krasner’s work in more than half a century. This fact itself, the show makes clear, is astonishing. Krasner, one of a number of neglected female 20th-century artists finally getting the attention they deserve, is among the greatest expressionists of her era, rendering a breadth of emotion in abstract swoops and shards of color. Her resistance to a unifying style of painting, her enduring reputation not as an artist but as the wife of Jackson Pollock, and the obdurate sexism of the art establishment have all contributed to her work being sidelined. But to see so much of it in one space—nearly 100 individual pieces spanning 50 years—is to see an artist imposing harmony on the world, balancing the organic with the artificial, order with chaos, destruction with reinvention.

Part of the exhilaration of the Barbican show also comes from witnessing the pivotal moments in Krasner’s career, and the breakthroughs in technique that sparked her most fertile periods. Born in Brooklyn in 1908, the child of Russian-Jewish immigrants, she tweaked her style as consistently as she edited her name, changing from “Lena” to “Lenore” to “Lee,” and streamlining “Krassner” to “Krasner” because, she once said, “that was enough writing to do.” In 1932, in the midst of the Depression, Krasner studied life drawing under the painter Job Goodman, making crayon studies that were elegant but almost obscenely muscular, capturing the human body in ripples and swells of sinew. By 1937 she was a scholar of Hans Hofmann, the German modernist who introduced Krasner to cubism. His tutelage sparked a loosening in her style, a shift from subdued study to spiky shapes in frenzied scribbles.

Another breakthrough came in 1945, after Krasner had married Pollock and helped introduce him to the principles of modernist painting. At the couple’s farmhouse in Springs, Long Island, Krasner began to craft her “Little Images,” hieroglyphic works in which recurring patterns peek through dark slabs of paint. Untitled (1947) is a playful riot suggesting butterfly wings and candy wrappers; Mosaic Table, which Krasner made at Pollock’s urging to help furnish their home, is a kaleidoscope of colored shapes set in cement that evokes one of Krasner’s most revered artists, Henri Matisse.

Failure, for Krasner, sometimes sparked her most significant revelations. Her first works of collage, crafted from torn-up shreds of paper and sackcloth, came after Krasner, in an orgiastic wave of self-pity after an unsuccessful show, ripped up every drawing in her studio. This cycle of annihilation and renewal would recur for the rest of her career. Krasner’s collages layer fragments of paper and strokes of paint together in a kind of intentional disorder. Untitled (1954) suggests water with its veins of royal blue and pastel yellow. Bald Eagle (1955) is a bolder confluence of pink and orange, with birdlike shreds of paper and dark blotches.

Again and again, she experimented, rejecting any signature technique or method. In 1956, as Pollock was drinking heavily and declining to paint, she made Prophecy, an alarmingly figurative work set against a black backdrop, which suggests the shape of a woman stretched into balloon-like segments, pink and pendulous. There are visible red smudges across the work. Krasner described it as “fraught with foreboding.” A month or so later, while she was in Paris, Pollock was killed in a car crash (his mistress, who was also in the vehicle, survived). Krasner came home, and she painted. “Painting is not separate from life,” she said at the time. “It is one. It is like asking—do I want to live? My answer is yes—and I paint.”

Immediately after Pollock’s death, Krasner made three more paintings similar to Prophecy—works in which accumulations of body parts seem to cluster together in chaos. Flesh tones and drips of pink paint surround circular eyes dotted around the canvas. In Three in Two (1956), for instance, slashes of crimson paint at the top of the frame suggest wounds and blood. By the following year, Krasner had abandoned color for her “Night Journeys,” the kineticism of which conveys a kind of feeling that’s less raw, but more intense. The eroticized pinks and reds have made way for sludgier tones, but the energy Krasner gives her brushstrokes and spatters suggests a woman who is surrendering to something and conquering it all at the same time.

It’s this primacy of feeling, and the constant duality of opposing forces balancing each other out, that make her work so spectacular to behold. Her colossal canvases sweep spectators into their undulating curves and depths of color. And the elements that recur throughout her career—shapes and rudimentary symbols, the contrast of line and loop, the triumph of negative space—imply that Krasner, as an artist, is always in control. Newer works cannibalize old ones; reinvention overpowers consistency. Her subject matter is herself, and her career is defined by outbursts of brazen force and emotive intensity.



There’s good reason to discuss hobbits again this spring: On Friday, a biopic about the life of J. R. R. Tolkien opens in theaters nationwide, just as an exhibition of the author’s art, manuscripts, and maps concludes at the Morgan Library and Museum in New York City. The mumbling, mild-mannered Oxford professor who brought imaginary realms to life remains one of the most popular writers in the world more than 60 years after the publication of The Lord of the Rings. And if six Hollywood blockbusters weren’t enough, Amazon Prime is now producing a new series based on less explored parts of the Middle-earth mythology.

Such runaway success was never guaranteed for Tolkien. A close look at his life reveals that he faced fierce criticism and had his own doubts about his writing career. Tolkien was perhaps never so unsure of the future than in January 1945, when, with World War II winding down and The Lord of the Rings still nearly 10 years away from being released, he published a semiautobiographical short story titled “Leaf by Niggle” in The Dublin Review. The story provides a window into Tolkien’s creative process and his hope that fantasy stories, often considered mere children’s fare, would gain a genuine foothold in literature and transport readers to new realms.

In the story, Niggle is a painter, although “not a very successful one”—the type “who can paint leaves better than trees,” Tolkien writes. For some time, Niggle has been working on a painting of a great tree and its surroundings, but he can never seem to finish it, as he faces one minor setback after another. Eventually, Niggle is whisked away on a mysterious journey by train. He arrives at a workhouse, where his life is scrutinized by two disembodied voices. The voices send him to the countryside, where Niggle encounters his painting again, except that now he’s living inside it: The tree and the mountains he painted are real.

“Leaf by Niggle” is one of the only short stories Tolkien ever composed. Although he once wrote, “I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations,” this tale is indeed an allegory and not always the subtlest one: Niggle’s journey takes him through the stages of death. The workhouse where Niggle is evaluated is purgatory, and the countryside where he ends up is heaven. Although some of the story’s themes may be heavy-handed, the prose in “Leaf by Niggle” has an ethereal quality that evokes the transcendent. Its core ideas are honest and soul-searching. Aside from The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit, it might be Tolkien’s finest work.

The autobiographical aspects of “Leaf by Niggle” stand out in particular. The story reflects Tolkien’s love of nature; in a preface to one reprinting, the author wrote that he was inspired by a “great-limbed poplar tree” he saw in real life that “was suddenly lopped and mutilated by its owner.” The tree’s only crime, Tolkien speculated, was being “large and alive.” In J. R. R. Tolkien: Author of the Century, the scholar Tom Shippey argues that the story’s plot is personal, with Niggle as a stand-in for Tolkien himself. Shippey notes that Tolkien was the perpetual “niggler” by the word’s dictionary definition—a perfectionist and procrastinator who dabbled in the minutiae of Middle-earth for years, creating languages and genealogies, but who had a hard time finishing stories. Those in the story who doubt Niggle can be read as Tolkien’s critics, including some of his Oxford colleagues, who found fantasy fiction to be childish and who couldn’t understand why a successful scholar would waste his time on it. But what makes “Leaf by Niggle” so useful for understanding Tolkien is how it illustrates his ambitious vision for what fantasy literature ought to be and do.

Tolkien believed that fantasy worlds need to seem real. In his essay “On Fairy Stories,” which has been reprinted together with “Leaf by Niggle” in Tree and Leaf, Tolkien explained that compelling fantasy depends on the author’s “subcreation” of a secondary world that has “an inner consistency of reality.” In attempting to achieve this verisimilitude, the author is, according to Tolkien, both a creator and a discoverer. He noted in a revealing 1955 letter to W. H. Auden that while writing The Lord of the Rings,

I met a lot of things on the way that astonished me ... I had never been to [the town of] Bree. [Seeing the character] Strider sitting in the corner at the inn was a shock, and I had no more idea who he was than had Frodo ... I was as mystified as Frodo at Gandalf’s failure to appear on September 22.

The idea of the writer or artist as a discoverer is underscored in “Leaf by Niggle.” The painter’s masterpiece is first described as having “begun with a leaf caught in the wind, and it became a tree ... Strange birds came and settled on the twigs and had to be attended to.” Niggle isn’t so much the maker of his painting as he is a wanderer in its realm. Tolkien felt that fantasy ought to be so immersive that even its creators feel as if they are exploring unknown lands that have always existed.

As lifelike as these fictional places might seem, Tolkien is conscious of the gulf between the real world and the invented one. Niggle’s art flourishes in his afterlife, but leaves little obvious mark back in his hometown; indeed, his canvas is used to patch his neighbor’s roof. Toward the end of the story, the reader learns that a single leaf is preserved in a museum (with the title Leaf: by Niggle), but the museum burns down, and “the leaf, and Niggle, were entirely forgotten in his old country.” Shippey’s autobiographical interpretation here is that Tolkien feared his own work would be forgotten. But this ending can also be read as a commentary on what Tolkien believed made good fantasy literature. Niggle’s painting becomes real elsewhere, regardless of what happens to the canvas.

Why travel to a location that is purposely disconnected from modern life? In other words, why read or write fantasy? Niggle’s neighbors, for example, see no value in his art; after Niggle departs for the afterlife, one townsperson wonders why he cared so much about the “digestive and genital organs of plants.” These comments echo those of skeptics who see fantasy as merely escapist. In his 1956 review, “Oo, Those Awful Orcs!,” the literary critic Edmund Wilson derided The Lord of the Rings as an “overgrown fairy story, a philological curiosity.” Even worse, the journalist and surrealist fiction writer Maurice Richardson declared that after reading The Two Towers, he could barely restrain himself from “slouching through the streets” with a signboard on which was written Adults of all ages! Unite against the infantilist invasion.

But Tolkien and his critics were talking past each other. The author believed that a well-realized fantasy world is just as important as mundane existence—if not more so. Tolkien also thought the genre should be escapist and offer renewal by emphasizing timeless themes such as nature and good and evil, as “Leaf by Niggle” demonstrates. At the close of the story, one of Niggle’s neighbors speaks wistfully about seeing a corner of Niggle’s painting: “It was damaged, but legible: a mountain-peak and a spray of leaves. I can’t get it out of my mind.” The reader then learns that the two voices who evaluated Niggle in the workhouse have begun to send many others to the country of his painting because of its great therapeutic value and restorative benefits. Fantasy, Tolkien suggests, is a way out that’s also a return to fundamentals: the tree and leaf, earth and stone. It revives those who are choking on the exhaust fumes of modernity.

Perhaps it is these qualities of fantastic realism and grounded escapism that make Tolkien’s works ever relevant. Middle-earth discards the trappings of modernity but still speaks to the human condition, transporting readers beyond everyday experience while remaining solid and true. If so many people nowadays choose to travel there, it’s because Tolkien explored it first and showed them the way. In “Leaf by Niggle,” as in his other, more famous writings, Tolkien’s prose becomes a portal to lands where there is always “a new road or a secret gate” and something very real and very valuable waiting to be discovered.



The city at the heart of Joe Talbot’s new film, The Last Black Man in San Francisco, is depicted with equal parts whimsy and despair. The opening images track a little girl, dressed up for school, as she skips along the bay, with a soft oboe score playing on the soundtrack. As she runs, she zips by police tape and men in hazmat suits who are engaged in the cleanup of the toxic water behind her. Quickly, the action turns to Jimmie (played by Jimmie Fails) and Montgomery (Jonathan Majors), best friends skateboarding around San Francisco’s historic Fillmore District. Talbot’s camera turns to take in a city half in the past and half in the future, where dilapidated storefronts buttress gorgeous mansions, and fleece-wearing tech bros gaze in horror at our heroes having fun.

Talbot’s film, his feature debut, is a personal story he devised with Fails as a teen (Talbot co-wrote the screenplay with Rob Richert). It follows Fails, who plays a character named after himself, as he tries to reclaim the magnificent home he lived in as a child, one his grandfather supposedly built in 1946. Every day, Jimmie gets up in the home he shares with Montgomery (an aspiring playwright who lives with his grandfather) and skates to the Fillmore to do upkeep on a house that technically doesn’t belong to him—painting the shutters, replanting the garden, trimming the hedges. The home’s owners try to shoo him away, but to Jimmie, they’re just tenants, people moving through a place that’s always been his.

The Last Black Man in San Francisco won prizes at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, and it has the painterly, mannered approach of other titans of American indie cinema, such as Wes Anderson and Paul Thomas Anderson. Every frame feels precisely blocked, and even Talbot’s efforts to capture the more desolate parts of the city have a haunted sort of beauty to them. This is no work of hard-hitting realism; it’s more of an elegy for the world Talbot and Fails grew up in. At times, Talbot’s emphasis on style is a little too precious to connect with emotionally, but there’s at least an inherent sweetness to the story.

What plot there is meanders along slowly. When the Fillmore homeowners depart and the house is left empty because of an estate dispute, Jimmie seizes the opportunity to move in, ignoring its multimillion-dollar asking price and enlisting Montgomery to help him transport the Fails family’s old belongings back inside. The rest of the action ping-pongs between the fantasy life the two friends create inside their reclaimed manse and the reality that begins to encroach on them anyway, as neighbors find out about their daring reclamation project and Montgomery clashes with some tougher friends from his side of town.

Given its setting, The Last Black Man in San Francisco reminded me most of last year’s Oakland-set Blindspotting, another filmmaking debut that told a tragicomic tale of ever-changing life in the Bay Area. Where that film was kinetic, Talbot’s is sleepy and pensive, but both are powered by extreme earnestness. “You can’t hate it unless you love it,” Jimmie says of San Francisco at one point, and both stories are about that essential struggle—the deep love people have for the places they’re brought up in, and the deep despair they have for the ways those places change.

As The Last Black Man in San Francisco moves on, it tells snapshot stories about the rest of its ensemble. There are Montgomery’s grandfather (Danny Glover), Jimmie’s sister Wanda (Tichina Arnold), and Jimmie’s irascible father James (Rob Morgan), who angrily tries to dismiss his son’s rose-tinted memories of his childhood in the city. The film then shambles toward a grand finale in which Montgomery stages a play he’s been writing inside the magical house, a dramatic attempt to tie the movie’s themes together after two hours of gentle narrative.

The conclusion doesn’t quite land. Talbot’s storytelling approach is a little too hermetic and abstract, and Montgomery is an inscrutable character for much of the movie, played by Majors as a gentle giant who’s been holding in profound insights. The Last Black Man in San Francisco works best as a mood piece, and as its final act swung back toward heavy plotting, it mostly lost me, getting bogged down in thinly sketched interpersonal dynamics. The film’s greatest virtue lies in how it portrays the city it’s rhapsodizing about, and that’s what Talbot’s promising, large-canvas photography is best suited for.



When X-Men was released, in 2000, the idea of a comic-book “cinematic universe” wasn’t even a glint in the eyes of Marvel executives. Superhero movies in general were a box-office gamble, the kind of project that stars and big directors tended to avoid. But in the 19 years since, the X-Men movie franchise (owned by 20th Century Fox) has released 12 films, seven in the main series and five Wolverine- and Deadpool-focused spin-offs. Some have been good, some absolutely awful, and plenty have fallen somewhere in the middle. X-Men: Dark Phoenix, which will likely be the last go-round with these characters before Disney’s merger with 20th Century Fox folds the enterprise into the former’s Marvel Cinematic Universe, makes for an underwhelming finale. The movie is a mostly bad, self-serious rehash of story arcs that have been put on film before.

More than anything, though, Dark Phoenix feels quaint. The X-Men series has none of the calibrated polish of the main Marvel movies, in which every post-credits scene and superstar cameo points toward a five-year road map of films designed to dominate at the box office. Dark Phoenix has stars such as Jennifer Lawrence and Michael Fassbender, and it has some spectacular-looking action sequences where superpowered mutants do glorious battle. But despite the epic nature of the story it’s adapting, the whole project comes off as chintzy and slapdash.

The film is set in 1992, ostensibly to satisfy the bizarre continuity that’s been haltingly laid out over the past six X-Men movies. In practice, all this means is that Fassbender, an actor in his early 40s, looks painfully implausible as Magneto, a character who survived the Holocaust and should be pushing 60 by now (not to mention that he’s supposed to be aging into Ian McKellen in the next few years). Such chronological messiness would be easy to forgive if it served any larger purpose, but it’s only a side effect of the many reinventions the X-Men have suffered as they’ve struggled to keep pace with the billion-dollar Avengers movies.

Dark Phoenix is a case in point. This is the second time the series has attempted to adapt what’s probably the most famous story line from the X-Men comics: the saga of an alien entity that inhabits the mind of the mutant Jean Grey and gives her incredible destructive power. The first go-round was the risible 2006 Brett Ratner film X-Men: The Last Stand, which indicated Jean Grey’s turn to darkness by dressing her in a particularly vile-looking corset. This time, Jean Grey is played by Sophie Turner of Game of Thrones, and her new personality is represented via a bunch of fiery, crackling lines that spread across her face. But the intended dramatic weight of her transformation is largely missing.

That’s partly because Turner’s time as the character has thus far amounted to a minor supporting role in the last X-Men movie, Apocalypse, which was the fourth in the series directed by Bryan Singer. He moved on to make Bohemian Rhapsody before being embroiled in controversy; Dark Phoenix is written and directed by Simon Kinberg, a longtime Hollywood screenwriter and producer graduating to his filmmaking debut. Kinberg has at his disposal a talented ensemble who have been absorbed into the series over various reboots, including Fassbender, Turner, Lawrence (as Mystique), James McAvoy (Charles Xavier), Nicholas Hoult (Beast), Tye Sheridan (Cyclops), and Alexandra Shipp (Storm). But these actors have never really managed to make those characters their own.

As a result, when Jean begins to wrestle with the awesome might of her new Phoenix powers, it’s hard to get too worked up about the death and destruction she starts dealing out. Sheridan, wearing Cyclops’s trademark red visor, affects a pained face as he begs Jean to turn away from evil, but his appeal to her love for him falls flat; the romance between the two characters was established by different actors, half a generation ago. The script leans on connections, such as a relationship between Beast and Mystique, that had essentially slipped my mind since the last X-Men entry, while other drastic developments (Magneto now leads an independent mutant country on a remote island) are introduced with no explanation whatsoever.

Much of the plotting is devoted to the ways that Xavier, a powerful telepath, manipulated Jean’s mind when she was young to protect her from herself. The rest of the X-Men are furious at him over this for about half the movie before they abruptly let him off the hook. Similarly sloppy are the motivations of the alien antagonist Vuk (Jessica Chastain), who manipulates Jean for reasons that are never made clear. Vuk exists mostly to nudge the action toward a few lazy set pieces, one of which follows our heroes as they bravely try to cross a New York City street. The final showdown is on an armored train that gets lifted several feet into the air, a far cry from the intergalactic battle on the moon that caps off the comic-book version of the story.

Kinberg’s narrative choices aren’t without foundation; everything he’s doing, plot-wise, in Dark Phoenix draws from the rich, decades-old history of the X-Men comics. But he’s pulling in elements from all over the timeline and lobbing them at an audience that probably lacks his encyclopedic knowledge. The overqualified cast do their best to inject some passion into the proceedings—Fassbender, in particular, is incapable of phoning it in—but the momentum drained out of these X-Men movies long ago. Dark Phoenix should serve as a fittingly perfunctory farewell.



Editor's Note: This article is one in a series of responses to Elizabeth Winkler’s article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?,” in the June issue of the magazine.

It’s a hard life for biographers of Shakespeare, softened only by their royalties. Very little is known about the man himself, and what is known has been in the public domain for a long time. The most recent discovery with any significant relation to his private life (a deposition in a lawsuit contained in the so-called Belott-Mountjoy papers) dates back to 1909. Given that no letters survive and very few documents of a nonofficial nature do either, it is perhaps not surprising that speculation about the bard runs wild. What does at first seem puzzling is why this should so often extend to questioning not so much the verifiable facts of his life (such as his origins in Stratford-upon-Avon and his membership in a leading London theater company) but the authorship of his work. The plays modern readers know as Shakespeare’s were regularly attributed to him not only after his death, but also by a large number of his contemporaries. Since some of these contemporaries—including the cantankerous Ben Jonson—had close connections with the theater, the “anti-Stratfordians,” as those who dispute Shakespeare’s true identity are called, have to imagine some kind of conspiracy of silence for which the motives are not at all clear.

One reason speculation has taken this turn is that people have difficulty reconciling Shakespeare’s relatively modest social background, and the fact that he did not go to university, with the sophistication of his writing. This seems to be part of the stimulus for proposing Christopher Marlowe, who was a Cambridge graduate, or the 17th Earl of Oxford, whose claims to refinement are in his title, as the plays’ real author. While Emilia Bassano, the subject of Elizabeth Winkler’s recent article, “Was Shakespeare a Woman?” is a late entrant in this race, her candidacy appears to have been prompted by similar feelings of wonderment at what one discovers in Shakespeare’s writings, in particular the rare insight into a woman’s feelings. This argument hardly puts Bassano in pole position, but she has at least one obvious advantage over her two male contenders: She lived on for many years after Shakespeare’s death in 1616. That Marlowe was murdered in 1593, and the Earl of Oxford died in 1604, requires their supporters to perform feats of intellectual ingenuity that Winkler is spared.

One of my objections to those who claim that Shakespeare did not write the works attributed to him is that they are obliged to indulge in even more logical gymnastics than the biographers who set out to discover what he was “really like.” The nature of such gymnastics was brilliantly exposed by Samuel Schoenbaum in his 1970 book, Shakespeare’s Lives. In 2012, because Schoenbaum’s lessons did not seem to have been taken on board, I wrote what I hoped would be a small addendum to his work in The Truth About William Shakespeare. I attempted to provide an inventory of some of the devices biographers since Schoenbaum have employed to obscure the fact that they were having to make bricks without straw.

My personal favorite among these strategies, although it is by no means the most prominent, is the argument from absence. For example, a couple of Shakespeare biographers, including the writer Anthony Burgess, have argued that he must have died of syphilis because, in addition to the fact that the signature on his will is spidery and his writings contain numerous allusions to venereal disease, no references to him exist in his doctor son-in-law’s surviving notebooks—a clear indication, according to Burgess, that “decency prevailed over clinical candour.” There are faint echoes of this style of reasoning in Winkler’s enthusiasm for the absence of records showing that Shakespeare was paid for anything he wrote, though the devices she employs, or borrows from her sources, are usually more familiar (and less fun). She says, for instance, that Jonson’s poem “On Poet-Ape,” which satirizes some unidentified and unknown plagiarist, “was likely taking aim at Shakespeare.” But as she goes on to the difficult task of explaining away the contribution Jonson made to the First Folio in 1623, she assumes what was previously only “likely” as an undoubted fact.

Attempting to dispute Winkler’s case at every turn would be wearisome for all concerned. I can only say that reading through Winkler’s description of the arguments the scholar and theater director John Hudson has put forward for Emilia Bassano as the power behind Shakespeare’s pen makes me remember a dream I used to have when I was more directly involved in these matters a few years ago. In it, I had been accused of some unspecified crime, of which any fair-minded review of the evidence showed I was innocent. But as I entered the courtroom, and saw that the jury was composed half of Shakespeare biographers and half of anti-Stratfordians, I knew at once that my goose was cooked.

Why should it matter, many sensible readers will complain, who wrote Shakespeare’s works, as long as we have them? What difference does it make? In his later life, Sigmund Freud, whom Winkler correctly identifies as an anti-Stratfordian, gave an account of how he discovered psychoanalysis, which was adopted by his biographer Ernest Jones and has since convincingly been shown to be wildly inaccurate, if not positively mendacious. In Jacques Lacan & Co., her influential history of psychoanalysis in France, Élisabeth Roudinesco argued that Freud’s invention couldn’t necessarily be opposed to the mere reality of facts; the genuine truth of this story, she concluded, lay in the way the psychoanalytic movement tells itself the initial fantasies of its birth. One or two recent biographers of Shakespeare have flirted with this postmodern notion of origins, but their scholarly instincts are usually too strong for them not to want to tell the truth about the past, if they were only able to discover it.

How a discovery confirming Shakespeare’s identity would change our reading of the plays and poems is impossible to say, but it is hard not to sympathize with D. H. Lawrence when he was introducing a collection of his own poetry and explaining why he felt it necessary to provide a little biographical background. “If we knew a little more of Shakespeare’s self and circumstance,” he wrote, “how much more complete the Sonnets would be to us, how their strange, torn edges would be softened and merged into the whole body!” This seems to me true whether we regard the sonnets as in fact the work of Stratford’s Shakespeare, or of Emilia Bassano.



Every week for the eighth and final season of Game of Thrones, three Atlantic staffers will be discussing new episodes of the HBO drama. Because no screeners were made available to critics in advance this year, we’ll be posting our thoughts in installments.

David Sims: After eight years of buildup, with promises of zombie swarms and ice dragons, it can finally be said: The Night King is a real bore. A party pooper to the extreme. I’m glad he’s dead! Season after season of Game of Thrones has passed with the frost-faced White Walker silently promising doom for the denizens of Westeros. After all that, it took only one epic episode, “The Long Night,” to dash all his plans and turn him and his dramatically inert army into a pile of snowflakes. Now I’m here to dance on the Night King’s grave.

For the past two episodes, I have pleaded for the show to get the White Walkers out of the way so that viewers can return to the more important stuff—Westerosi politicking and grand romantic tension, the twin pillars that have held up Game of Thrones for nearly a decade. The problem, of course, was that the teeming wave of death from above the Wall couldn’t be easily batted away: It was part of the show’s very first set piece, and more often than not has been relied on for a cliffhanger at the end of a season. So David Benioff and D. B. Weiss had to put audiences through the wringer of yet another massive battle episode, similar to editions such as “Blackwater,” “The Watchers on the Wall,” “Hardhome,” and “Battle of the Bastards.”

“The Long Night” was directed by Miguel Sapochnik, who also helmed “Hardhome” and “Battle of the Bastards,” and it was filled with all his favorite visual flourishes. There were long tracking shots that staked out the location of every character before chaos arrived at the walls of Winterfell, plenty of shaky naturalism once the violence began, and, of course, darkness. Lots and lots of darkness. That the Night King fights at night is hardly surprising, I suppose, but as a result the action was mostly choppy and unsatisfying. Less was always more: The opening sequence involving the Dothraki charge into total darkness was gripping and clear. Once the horde of corpses arrived, though, my brain quickly turned off.

Hence my main point: The Night King is dull as dishwater. The comparison between his army of death and the looming threat of environmental catastrophe might feel facile, but in the end that’s all it really amounted to. The White Walkers were a means to unite ice and fire—Jon and Daenerys—and build an alliance in the North in order to sort out all the lingering conflict in the South. They served no plot purpose other than to threaten to bring about the apocalypse, and the only thing more boring, story-wise, than defeating the Night King would have been letting him win and cover the world in mute zombies.

The manner of his offing—death from above by Arya, wielding the Valyrian-steel dagger an assassin tried to murder Bran with way back in Season 1—was undeniably cool. I was a little let down, though, that Arya didn’t get to use her specific skills more (why not have her disguise herself as a White Walker?), but as far as dei ex machina go, it’s hard to argue with the pint-size killer Stark. Her supposed rulers, Daenerys and Jon, were by and large duds throughout the conflict, zooming around the sky on their dragons, unable to see most of the action. Bran, meanwhile, did little more than warg into a flock of ravens to alert the Night King to his presence.

But then, that was Bran’s apparent purpose in this Deathbowl: to sit tight and draw the Night King close so that Arya could get a clean shot at him. Melisandre’s return to Winterfell suggested that the final outcome had been preordained, much like some of the episode’s big deaths (Beric and Theon, along with Jorah, Edd, and little Lyanna Mormont). Melisandre even brought up a prophecy from Season 3, when she referred to Arya killing someone with brown eyes (the long-departed Lord Frey), blue eyes (the Night King), and … green eyes. Could the latter be Cersei?

Who knows. As the dust settles in Winterfell, major characters will mostly be happy to be alive, but they might quickly get to pointing fingers over what a disaster this battle was. Fighting an army of the dead is never easy, but Daenerys and Jon’s output was so pitiful here that I worry their alliance might not make it to the final conflict with Cersei. Either way, I’m glad the story can make its way south again, where the sun shines and the action is a little easier to follow. Spencer and Lenika, did you hope for more from the Battle of Winterfell?

Spencer Kornhaber: I’m satisfied, but my eyes need a rest. No one predicted this twist: HBO spent millions of dollars on weeks of muddy stunt work only to have some production assistant drape Lady Olenna’s delicate muslin veils over the cameras. The scenery already looked as dark as a Goya painting at the start of the episode, but when the (rather unexplained) ice storm blew in, I had to scurry from the couch to the floor, inches from the TV, so as to try to make out the action. A Thrones episode had become a Cocteau Twins music video, all blurred and strobe-lit.

Which wasn’t totally a bad thing. It makes some sense to swamp viewers in the same fog of war that the characters were in. Though frustrating at times, the haze was an example of Benioff, Weiss, and Sapochnik’s smart aesthetic riffing. Eight seasons into Thrones, castle battles are getting boring. Nine years into The Walking Dead, so are zombie hordes. But this edition of slash-and-hacking skeletons was broken into distinct sensory chapters: the eerie absences of the first approach, the psychedelic blizzard that followed, the dragon riders gorgeously zipping above the clouds to a whole new world, Arya’s quiet Resident Evil level in the library, and a dramatic music video for the composer Ramin Djawadi’s second big piano piece of the series. The visual variability helped make “The Long Night” one of Thrones’s few front-to-back riveting episodes.

Moreover, each scene tended to nicely tie together long-running story elements—the ice, the fire, the strange fact that Dolorous Edd hadn’t fulfilled his destiny as an expendable till now. After having the Unsullied’s awesomeness told more than shown in Daenerys’s interminable adventures in Essos, I felt a weird pang of pride seeing the spearmen hold the line against the dead when other regiments were routed. But it was Arya’s slayage that offered the most payoff. Though we’ve seen her shut many an opponent’s eye previously, her hail of staff-whirls and well-timed stabs nearly justified all those mopping scenes at the House of Black and White in Season 5. She felt like the right character to fell the Night King, because she was the one who had trained for this moment the most. She had faced death to face death.  

It must be said, though, that much of the episode’s tension was bound up with nonsense worth yelling at the screen about. Jon and Dany getting lost when they should have been roasting wights: just baffling. Grey Worm’s flaming trench appeared to be a decent delayer of the dead, but why didn’t the soldiers build more than just one of them? Why weren’t there vats of burning coal on the ramparts? Why did everyone seem so surprised to see the newly dead rise mid-battle when they’d presumably been informed that was the Night King’s big trick? It was good Bran sent out ravens amid the carnage, but that also highlighted just how little scouting the Winterfell forces had done before the apocalypse was at their doorstep.

Then again, Thrones gave up its claim to much realism a few seasons back. This is thoroughly TV for TV’s sake now, and tonight it resulted in something fun and freaky—and oddly gentle to the characters. Last week’s host of farewells prepped viewers to assume the body count would be savage, yet at the end of the fight, seeming goners such as Tormund and Podrick still live. The deaths that did happen—each featuring drawn-out final gasps, slo-mo, and/or weepy music—were treated as bigger deals for the viewer than they probably needed to be. (Just how many scenes have we previously seen of Theon redemption? Did anyone request another?) The one exception was the squishing of Lyanna Mormont in an excellently callous dispatching of a fan favorite, which is the sort of gasp trigger that was once key to Thrones’s appeal.

The conclusion of the episode made for a different class of surprise: It’s more like Hollywood than like George R. R. Martin for the Night King’s horde to be zapped all at once. I agree, David, that Cersei-related intrigue makes for the real fun of this show, but Thrones has just spent so much time over the years on the subject of White Walkers. The march of the dead had long felt like a pesky side plot that surely would amount to something profound—but now it really does appear that the undead were mere minibosses the characters needed to kill before the final evil. Which is just deflating.

Nailing a post–Night King ending for the show will mean clearly conveying what the contenders for the Iron Throne stand for beyond their own bloodlines. The dragons, damaged as they were tonight, should play less of a role than before. That the episode ended with Melisandre evaporating may have seemed strange—hers was not the most anticipated death of the evening—except when you consider the implications. The gods have had their fight. An age of magic is drawing to a close. We’re left with the living, and there’s something scary in that, too.

Lenika Cruz: I think “The Long Night” is an episode Thrones fans will argue about forever. There was a lot to love, including some mesmerizing sequences from Miguel Sapochnik (who also directed the show’s best installment, “The Winds of Winter”) and a smattering of beautifully tender moments (like the ones shared between Tyrion and Sansa). The first half of the episode really tapped into a sickening current of dread and demonstrated some of the most effective uses of silence in the entire series.

Though I was gripped by much of the episode—convinced that the so-called plot armor was off for everyone and that literally anything could happen—I started getting frustrated the more I saw important characters escape from impossibly close-call encounters, again and again. (As soon as Edd saved Sam, I was like, “That means Edd’s going to die right now” and then, yep, a sword went through his face.) The rest of “The Long Night” saw friends conveniently saving friends and nearly all of our favorites managing to fight off waves of shrieking zombies while no-names perished in droves. So much for suspense. Eventually, given how dark and blurry everything was, I just had to trust that if someone important was going to die, Thrones would at least make sure their face was well lit. Indeed, everyone significant who fell got a heroic, clearly visible send-off—except for the poor Dothraki in the vanguard. 

I think the degree to which you are satisfied or unsatisfied with this episode depends in large part on what kind of show you believe Game of Thrones to be—or at least what kind of show you want it to be. How much do you want it to continue to subvert expectations, to twist your stomach with an unthinkable death or reversal of fortune? How much do you believe the show values backroom politicking over more abstract environmental threats or spiritual conflicts guided by the invisible hands of the gods? After all the seasons of suffering, do you just want the supposed “heroes”—the “good guys”—to win? (The fact that I found myself seized by the desire to see stupid Jon get swarmed by wights and turned into a White Walker or something tells you something about my own sensibilities.)

“The Long Night” left me with mixed feelings that leaned toward disappointment and some confusion. On the one hand, I’m very open to the show getting back to the old power plays by people who don’t just want to annihilate the whole world. On the other hand, I’m deeply skeptical about how good the plotting and dialogue will be if Thrones fully goes that route. I worry that to be excited about that prospect is to believe the show can recapture the magic of its earlier seasons—a magic that I think is gone for good. While I agree, David, that the Night King was such a blank, simplistic villain, part of me was hoping this episode was going to reveal some surprising new dimension to what his grand plans might mean for the fate of Westeros.

And, David, I know you’re delighted about the Night King being gone for good and are happy to forget he existed if it means getting to the good stuff in King’s Landing. But … I can’t forget! I’m with Spencer on this one: I can’t ignore the years of being told this epic war between the living and the dead was the true conflict that superseded petty squabbles about who got to wear the fancy crown and be called “Your Grace.”

These past few seasons, Thrones was so successful at getting me to reconsider what the real stakes of its central story might be, so I feel a little betrayed after having the White Walker arc resolved so neatly (at least as far as we know). Was the Night King really only an excuse to get Dany and Jon together, to unite ice and fire? Perhaps I’d be okay with that if this royal pairing weren’t so unbearably dull. And maybe I’d be more excited about the action moving back south if Cersei currently felt like a compelling arch-nemesis for the show’s final act to be built around. Right now the very fascinating people in her orbit include Qyburn, Euron Greyjoy, (checks notes) Captain Strickland of the Golden Company, and precisely zero elephants.

It’s either a testament to a portion of Thrones fandom or a criticism of the show (or both) that most of the theories floating around—that Bran is the Night King, that the Night King would instead fly down and wreak havoc on King’s Landing—were more groundbreaking than what ended up happening.

Yes, Lyanna Mormont died a very cool and meaningful death. Yes, Jorah and Theon both redeemed themselves (again), this time by dying to save the ones they had betrayed years ago. Yes, Beric and Melisandre finally got some long-deserved rest, and the Night King got fatally shanked by the Faceless Men University’s most accomplished dropout, Arya Stark. But none of these losses hit me especially hard—or in a way that would have justified the gravity that the Battle of Winterfell had been freighted with. It might be odd to say this, but at the moment I’m having a tough time caring about who will rule the Seven Kingdoms, if that’s indeed the end game here. Maybe I’ll need to do a full rewatch of “The Long Night” and reassess. For now I’m just hoping that over the next three weeks, Game of Thrones can wind to a conclusion that honors the narrative and emotional heights it reached in its earlier seasons.



Leonardo da Vinci died at the age of 67 on May 2, 1519, at the small manor house in the Loire Valley given to him by King Francis I of France. He was buried nearby in the church of the Château d’Amboise, which was demolished in the early 19th century. An excavation decades later turned up bones that were believed to be Leonardo’s. An inscription notes carefully that the site holds the artist’s “presumed remains.” The acknowledgment of uncertainty is a mark of quiet candor, and unusual in this case: Leonardo enthusiasts are not famous for their restraint. Give them a small mystery and a bit of wiggle room, and the theories come quickly.

We will be hearing a lot about Leonardo this year, the 500th anniversary of his death. Exhibits are being readied in the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. In May, the Queen’s Gallery, at Buckingham Palace, will display Leonardo drawings from the Royal Collection (which owns about 500 of them). A major exhibition at the Louvre, which is home to five Leonardo paintings, including the Mona Lisa, will open in October.

So a wealth of Leonardo will be on display. Also on display—it never really stops—will be the musings of those who believe that they have finally solved some urgent Leonardo mystery, a mystery that might exist, like beauty, only in the mind of the beholder.

After half a millennium, the scholarship on Leonardo is immense, and continuing. Noteworthy developments include the rediscovery of Leonardo’s Salvator Mundi, the restoration of his Adoration of the Magi, and the discovery of a document that clears up uncertainties about the Mona Lisa. But Leonardo’s life and work have long been the stuff of speculation—“wild theories and untrammeled fantasy,” as Martin Kemp, a professor emeritus of art history at Oxford and one of the world’s foremost Leonardo scholars, describes them.

“I get bombarded with things about Leonardo on a regular basis that range from laughable to insane,” Kemp told me recently. The bombardiers include neuroscientists, dentists, ophthalmologists, psychologists, pathologists, geomorphologists, artists, photographers, and even some art historians.

Kemp has devised a taxonomy of disinformed or eccentric ideas about Leonardo. There are the mystic theorists (who believe that secret messages about the nature of the cosmos are concealed in Leonardo’s work); heresy theorists (who believe that Leonardo was involved in some sort of religious cabal); geo theorists (who fall over themselves trying to identify the background landscape in the Mona Lisa and other paintings); attribution theorists (who keep wanting to put Leonardo’s name on work that isn’t his); drag theorists (who believe that the Mona Lisa depicts either Leonardo or one of his pupils dressed as a woman); and sci-fi theorists (pretty much exactly what you’d imagine).

Kemp calls Dan Brown, the author of The Da Vinci Code, the “godfather” of some of these speculations. “He is responsible for the idea that there are hidden codes, messages, mystic geometries, disguised words, and esoteric numbers in Renaissance paintings,” he said. Carmen C. Bambach, a curator in the department of drawings and prints at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the author of an upcoming four-volume study, Leonardo da Vinci Rediscovered, hears from Leonardo disciples on the fringe at least once a week. A recent example: “Two men said that in Leonardo’s earliest dated drawing, The Arno Valley, from 1473, they saw elephants, camels, and birds in what is essentially a landscape. I commended them for their love of Leonardo, but said there are no elephants or other animals in the drawing.”

One of the more widespread Leonardo theories involves the figure of the apostle John, with his vaguely feminine features, in The Last Supper. The idea here—which parallels the findings of Brown’s Robert Langdon, a fictional “professor of symbology” at Harvard—is that Leonardo was depicting not John but Mary Magdalene, and that Church authorities through the centuries have waged a campaign to cover up an intimate relationship between Jesus and Mary. As far as I’m aware, no reputable scholar supports this interpretation of The Last Supper. Of course, the art establishment might just be part of the cover-up.

Not surprisingly, the Mona Lisa has come in for the closest scrutiny by nonexpert experts. Hidden images in the painting have been found by many. Ron Piccirillo, an artist in Rochester, New York, has claimed on his website that when he looked at the painting upside down and followed “the highlights of her portrait,” he was able to spot “what turned out to be a lion’s head, an ape head and a buffalo head.” He added that “for me, it helps to only use one eye,” and that the viewer should be “extremely close to the left edge of the painting.”

Silvano Vinceti, an art-history sleuth who runs something in Italy called the National Committee for the Promotion of Historical and Cultural Heritage, claims that he can discern minute letters painted in Mona Lisa’s eyes. In the right eye, for instance, he detects the letters L and V. The Louvre says that it has examined the painting with “every possible laboratory test” and has found no letters. This might have been a disappointment—the letters would have made Louis Vuitton a perfect corporate sponsor.

Claims about the background landscape in the Mona Lisa have become something of a growth industry. A paleontologist at the University of Florence, Carlo Starnazzi, argued in the mid-1990s that the lake on the left side of the painting is Lake Chiana and that the bridge on the right is the Burgiano Bridge, both near Arezzo. An art historian, Carla Glori, wrote in her 2010 book, The Leonardo Enigma, that the bridge in the painting can be found in Bobbio, a village south of Piacenza. An artist-photographer, Rosetta Borchia, and a geomorphologist from the University of Urbino, Olivia Nesci, believe the location is the Montefeltro region of northern Italy, and that the bridge can be seen from the heights of Valmarecchia.

In the eyes of some, the Mona Lisa raises medical issues and questions of physiological identity. Vito Franco, a professor of pathology at the University of Palermo, maintained in 2010 that Mona Lisa—the woman herself, Lisa Gherardini, the wife of Francesco del Giocondo, the Florentine silk merchant who commissioned Leonardo to paint the portrait—likely suffered from a cholesterol problem. Franco noted a yellowish accumulation of what he interpreted to be fatty acids under the skin. Kemp, at Oxford, checked the area under magnification and arrived at a different diagnosis: Residue from restoration efforts had “bleached.” One art historian, Angelo Paratico, in 2014 argued (in the same breath) that Mona Lisa might have been a Chinese slave and Leonardo’s mother.

Another theory: The Mona Lisa is a portrait of a man—either Leonardo himself or his pupil and possible lover, Salaì—dressed as a woman. The self-portrait theory found expression in a 1987 Art & Antiques article by Lillian Schwartz, an artist and computer technician who used digital tools to superimpose an image of a Leonardo self-portrait onto an image of the woman in the painting. No question, Schwartz concluded: Leonardo used himself as a model. A similar conclusion is reached in a video now on YouTube titled “Mona Lisa IS Leonardo da Vinci.” The viewer is urged to watch the overlay of a Leonardo self-portrait onto an image of the Mona Lisa in order to see “how amazingly they line up.” The notion that the Mona Lisa is a Leonardo self-portrait is not one that experts have rushed to embrace.

Other investigators have speculated that Mona Lisa’s expression suggests compulsive grinding of her teeth, poor diet, a dysfunctional marriage, deafness, or facial paralysis; that the look of contentment on her face and the coy placement of her hands indicate that she was pregnant; that she was a prostitute; that she is smiling with her mouth closed because her teeth had been blackened by mercury treatments for syphilis; or that she suffered from strabismus (crossed eyes). The Mona Lisa’s famous smile was analyzed in 2005 by researchers at the University of Amsterdam (with technical assistance from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), using what they called “emotion recognition” software. The researchers determined that the woman in the portrait was 83 percent happy, 9 percent disgusted, 6 percent fearful, and 2 percent angry.

My own study, conducted without the benefit of emotion-recognition software, suggests that experts such as Kemp and Bambach are 100 percent amused by analyses of this kind.

Fanciful rumination about Leonardo will never cease. But, as noted, there’s actual recent news. “One of the many important discoveries,” Bambach says, “was the firming up of what had been questioned about the Mona Lisa. Many historians had gone off on a tangent as to when it was painted, or that the portrait was not of Lisa del Giaconda but of Isabella d’Este and others. The painting had been dated by some as 1500 or 1512.” But in 2005, Armin Schlechter, a manuscript expert in the Heidelberg University library, came across a note, dated 1503, in which Agostino Vespucci, a Florentine official who knew Leonardo, indicated that the artist was working at that very moment on a portrait of Gherardini. That settled that.

The rediscovery of Salvator Mundi was a major event. A painting of that name by Leonardo was known to have existed, but accidents of history (and layers of “restoration”) had concealed its identity. At one point, in 1958, it was sold in Britain for £45 as a painting by someone else. In 2017, Salvator Mundi was auctioned at Christie’s for $450.3 million—this despite lingering questions about attribution among a few connoisseurs. Abu Dhabi’s Department of Culture and Tourism said that it was the buyer of Salvator Mundi and that the painting would be displayed at the Louvre Abu Dhabi; then, in September, the department announced that the unveiling had been postponed. It did not give any reason. In February, the Louvre confirmed that it hopes to display Salvator Mundi in its October show. The phrasing of the Louvre’s statement, according to The Art Newspaper, “suggests that the painting is still owned by a single individual, who is widely believed to be Mohammed bin Salman, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia.”

Also in 2017: Leonardo’s Adoration of the Magi, its restoration complete, was returned to public display at the Uffizi Gallery, in Florence. According to Frank Zöllner, an art historian at Leipzig University and the author of a catalogue raisonné of Leonardo, “Infrared and digital imaging has shown how he drew the 70 or so figures of the composition directly onto the prepared panel in freehand, without the means of transferring preliminary sketches onto the wood panel. The painting has sketchy elements because it was unfinished. It shows the artistic spontaneity of Leonardo.”

Kemp brought up another discovery: “Scientific examination of all his paintings has shed enormous light on how incredibly varied his technique was. Leonardo was always striving for something new. Every conception triggered new experimentation. For example, he used powdered glass mixed with gesso, instead of just gesso, in priming a painting to give it, presumably, a kind of radiance.”

As hundreds of Leonardo’s works travel around the globe, people will have more chances than ever before to see his technique firsthand. What would Leonardo have made of all the fuss over his quincentennial—and, for that matter, all the wild theorizing on the margins? I put the question to Kemp, anticipating the sort of censorious observation you’d expect from an Oxford don at a high table. I got something else.

“He would have loved it,” Kemp said. “He was interested in fame and immortality. He would have been pleased that his name is still on people’s lips.”



Like the superhero-turned-private-investigator she brought to life with the Netflix drama Marvel’s Jessica Jones, Melissa Rosenberg prefers not to overstay her welcome.

So, before the third season began filming in the summer of 2018, she chose to make it her last as the series’ showrunner. She signed a deal to develop projects at Warner Bros. Television. She told her cast, her fellow writers, and her crew ahead of the official announcement. She even selected her potential replacements, she told me one afternoon in early May: “I had two, three people I was working with who easily could have taken over the show if they wanted.”

And then, the death knell arrived. In February, Netflix axed the series along with The Punisher, which had just aired its second season. Because the streaming service had already canceled Daredevil, Luke Cage, and Iron Fist months earlier, the move effectively ended Marvel’s output on Netflix, the studio’s attempt to create a set of interconnected TV shows that would serve as the dark and gritty antidote to its big-screen offerings. But with one season still to air, Jessica Jones was left in a unique position: Its final batch of episodes would serve as the world’s last entry. The series had to pull double duty. “It doesn’t surprise me that Jessica is the last one standing,” Krysten Ritter, who stars as Jessica and directed her first episode this season, told me with a laugh. “Just like she would be after a long night.”

Rosenberg, though, wasn’t thinking about Jessica’s status as the universe’s final girl when she heard the news. “I was like, ‘Couldn’t you have told me that before I put everyone through hell, before I traumatized everybody by leaving?’” She laughed, then sighed. “It was really painful because I love these people so much, and I love this character.”

When Jessica Jones began in 2015, the series looked nothing like other comic-book adaptations. It featured the Marvel Cinematic Universe’s rare female franchise lead, but it wasn’t interested in superheroics or in Jessica’s superstrength. Instead, it examined its protagonist’s life after she’d tried the whole hero thing, failed, and thought she’d escaped from her tormentor, Kilgrave (David Tennant), the mind controller who’d made her his pet. Leaning heavily into noir—Jessica works as a private investigator and has a penchant for brown liquor and grim voice-overs—the show was about an abusive relationship and its aftereffects. “In the world of Marvel Comics, a female antihero—a female anything—is a step forward. But a rape survivor, struggling with P.T.S.D., is a genuine leap,” wrote the critic Emily Nussbaum for The New Yorker. “In a genre format that is often reflexively juvenile about sexuality, Jessica Jones is distinctly adult, an allegory that is unafraid of ugliness.”

In her final episodes, Jessica is still trying to shake off that dark worldview she adopted from her time with Kilgrave. It’s not easy: A serial killer is obsessed with her; her best friend and surrogate sister, Trish Walker (Rachael Taylor), has disappeared; and Jessica’s still grappling with her identity as a hero, which she’s struggled with throughout the show. Said Ritter: “This season’s about [Jessica] really trying to see, like, ‘Am I a hero? Can I be a hero?’”

Spoiler alert: Jessica figures out an answer to those questions. When Rosenberg learned of the series’ cancellation, she had enough time to rework the original cliff-hanger ending she’d envisioned for the season and to allow Jessica to close her final case. The death of the Marvel-Netflix project may have turned Jessica Jones’s third season into a lame duck, but to Rosenberg, it meant an opportunity to wrap up the story, even if she’d been prepared to leave the show in trusted hands. “We came to the party, had a great time,” she joked, “[and we] said goodnight before we were falling over drunk.”

The analogy would probably work better if the party weren’t already over. Though Jessica Jones gets a chance to finish on its own terms, the rest of the Marvel-Netflix lineup ended on tantalizing teases. Still, the muted finale to the Defenders—the unofficial nickname for the four heroes in the original lineup, who came together in a crossover miniseries with the same title—exemplifies the way the streaming landscape has evolved: No single genre dominates, and even a high-profile, highly anticipated experiment such as this one can fizzle out. On the big screen, audiences can’t get enough of superhero films, which have reigned at the box office for years. On TV, though, even superhero stories offered as a collection—with the promise of hours upon hours of narrative—can get kicked to the curb.

Netflix’s Hollywood headquarters are dazzling. As soon as visitors step inside the lobby, they’re greeted with trophy cases housing rows of Emmys and floor-to-ceiling screens promoting upcoming projects. (Stranger Things Season 3, back July 4!) But if they were to look beyond the lobby and into the rest of the building, they’d glimpse a poster of a skull, the one used in key art for The Punisher. And if they were to walk down the hallway, they’d find a conference room to the left named after The Defenders, with an image of the four titular heroes looming large over the space.

The building is littered with relics like these, unofficial memorials to dead shows. But in 2013, that wasn’t what Jeph Loeb, the head of Marvel Television, would have seen when he arrived to help deliver the supersize pitch that would result in the Marvel-Netflix universe. Netflix had just begun acquiring and producing its own streaming content. It had a handful of original series—House of Cards, Orange Is the New Black, Hemlock Grove, and Lilyhammer—and plans to go global. “It’s ironic to think that five years ago,” Loeb mused to me, Netflix “would need something that would help put them on the map.”

And yet, it did—which is why the streaming service committed to building an entire comic-book world. It agreed to making five interconnected shows totaling 60 episodes: Four New York–based comic-book characters dealing with street-level crime—the blind vigilante Daredevil, the hard-drinking P.I. Jessica Jones, the indestructible ex-con Luke Cage, and the martial-arts master Iron Fist—would receive solo series. They’d also team up in a miniseries. The project, modeled after Marvel’s Phase 1 films, which had culminated in 2012’s The Avengers, was unprecedented; small-screen crossovers were rare events, and the CW’s superhero universe had barely begun to form. (Arrow had just debuted its first season in 2012; The Flash would arrive in 2014.)

At the height of Marvel-Netflix’s run, the universe seemed like it would only grow: Its shows dominated eight production stages in New York, as overlapping crews shot three series at a time. The Defenders scored the A-list actress Sigourney Weaver to play the villain—a move that had fans chanting “holy shit” at New York Comic Con in 2016. All of the stand-alone shows received second-season orders, and Netflix greenlit The Punisher, a spin-off of Daredevil Season 2.

But last fall, a year after The Defenders aired, Netflix began canceling each of its series under the Marvel brand. The streamer hasn’t said much about these endings, aside from offering diplomatic statements. (Top executives weren’t made available for interviews for this story.) But shortly after the cancellation of Iron Fist in October, Netflix’s Chief Content Officer Ted Sarandos did provide a blunt response to a question about the future of the Marvel shows: “Those are for us to cancel,” he said, “and we’re super happy with their performance so far.”

Loeb admitted that he didn’t expect the universe to contract this way. “Look, I was surprised that we would not be doing Season 4 and 5 of all of our shows,” he said. “It was a decision that Netflix made, and that’s what we deal with … They call and they say, ‘We have some bad news; we’re not continuing.’ It’s not a discussion. It’s an edict.”

There is a silver lining, though, Loeb argued: For better or worse, the slate of shows Marvel brought helped legitimize the platform as a network interested in taking herculean swings. “People have told me that … when Marvel made the deal with Netflix, the rest of the town went, ‘Oh! Oh, [streaming]’s a real thing,’” Loeb said. “That was certainly not our intention,” he continued, chuckling. “Our intention was to get our shows on the air, but it really cemented that there was another way for people to tell stories.” In fact, with Netflix in the rearview mirror, Marvel TV is leaning into Hulu: Ghost Rider, Helstrom, and the animated universe The Offenders are set to start rolling out in 2020.

Change.org, the hub for online petitions, yields more than 150 results for the search term Marvel Netflix. Some entries have nothing to do with the Defenders, but most revolve around urging Netflix, Disney (which owns Marvel), or a combination of both to save the shows. (Even Iron Fist, the lowest-rated critically of the shows, is the subject of multiple ongoing petitions.) Daredevil fans are especially organized: They built a website, purchased billboards in Times Square, and coordinated an ongoing mass rewatch.

Campaigns to save canceled series are nothing new, and superhero shows tend to draw fan fervor. But the Marvel-Netflix universe might particularly linger in fans’ minds because the exact cause of its series’ abrupt ends has been unclear. Critics, in their eulogies, have speculated that the creation of Disney+, Disney’s own streaming platform, meant that Netflix opted to purge its library of Marvel titles rather than compete. They’ve also pointed to the waning popularity of the shows: Netflix rarely releases viewing data, but the marketing-analytics firm Jumpshot concluded that The Defenders had been the least-viewed Marvel series in its release month.

Over time, the entire operation had also become less and less connected, in viewers’ eyes. The universe had begun with a crossover-heavy bang: The seeds for the Defenders’ ultimate foe were planted in Daredevil Season 1; Luke Cage (Mike Colter) was introduced in Jessica Jones; and Rosario Dawson popped up in every series as the nurse Claire Temple. But after The Defenders, crossovers shrank into cameos, which became passing references in dialogue. Claire disappeared. So did the Avengers Tower from the New York skyline.

World-building for five shows at once is a complicated endeavor, and to Rosenberg, Jessica Jones never worked well as part of such an ambitious package deal. The Defenders had moments she enjoyed that furthered Jessica’s development—she mentioned Ritter’s verbal sparring with Charlie Cox (who plays Daredevil) as a high point—but being part of a universe that involved ninjas and dragons and alien invasions, in some ways, betrayed the character she’d brought to life. “Jessica in The Defenders was a challenge, because she’s so different from those characters that you begin to compromise her reality … by putting her in other people’s worlds,” she told me. “Jessica doesn’t really fit in a world where there are aliens. She’s very much of this Earth.”

And so, when it comes to seeing the larger universe over the finish line, Rosenberg and Ritter aren’t concerned. Jessica’s world has gotten knotty enough. The first season dealt with Jessica confronting her (literal) demon and the second with her confronting her origin; the third was their chance to have Jessica confront herself. “The story is always about … her psychological and emotional journey, and that gets difficult to do as the seasons go on,” Ritter said. “What has been so important to me is how personal we always keep the story.”

“I felt a real sense of closure,” Rosenberg said. “Each season [was] like an act in a play. [This was] a three-act play.”

Act I started with Jessica trying to control her shattered world. The first scene of the pilot found her with an unsatisfied client, a man who’d asked her to capture photographs of his spouse cheating on him with his brother. She did the job, but when she shared her findings with him, he got angry at her for delivering the truth. So she violently tossed him through the glass of her office door, in a shot taken straight from the comics.

Act III, though? In the opening minutes of the third season, Jessica deals with an equally unhappy customer—one who refuses to pay and then calls her a “third-rate Joan Jett wannabe”—but this time, Jessica doesn’t retaliate. This time, she walks away. “I hate heroism,” she thinks to herself. And then she returns to her office and pores over another case.



By the end of She’s Gotta Have It’s first season, back in 2017, the show’s effervescent protagonist chose to abandon the three men she’d been dating. Nola Darling, the fictional Brooklyn-based artist who animated Spike Lee’s 1986 film of the same name, had found a new love worth pursuing: the principle of honesty. “That’s why I painted The Three-Headed Monster,” she said in one of her many fourth-wall breaking monologues, referencing the collagelike painting she’d shown the men during a surprise group dinner. “It’s about the truth, and I understand, often, that is the hardest thing to get to—to land at a place where folks can find openness, candor, and frankness amongst each other.”

It might follow, then, that the show’s second season would find Nola (played by DeWanda Wise) attempting to carve out a life—or to make art—that exemplifies this commitment to vulnerability and critical thinking. Unfortunately, Nola’s development seems far less important to Lee, who executive-produced the series, than bizarre political gripes. Unconvincing as breezy sitcom or weighty satire, Season 2 of She’s Gotta Have It diverges further from Lee’s romance-centric source material but offers its protagonist little imaginative recourse.
Absent the guiding conflict of Nola’s polyamory, the new season of She’s Gotta Have It fills those gaps in her life with troubling misrepresentations of several social issues. Many of Season 1’s uncomfortable moments had to do with the show’s inability to reckon with just how much dating norms have changed since 1986; Season 2’s are more egregious, stemming from sweeping misrepresentations of black history and simplistic indictments of contemporary oppressors. No sun-filled, Icee-laden, natural hair–heavy Brooklyn series could buoy that narrative choice.

She’s Gotta Have It is jarring in its tonally confused commentary, but it’s not a wholly surprising offering from Lee. The Brooklyn-bred Do the Right Thing director effectively treated gentrification of his borough as its own character in the show’s first season. Lee depicted these shifts through the same telltale signs that greet black residents; every episode opened with a shot of a real-estate banner advertising an outrageously expensive house for sale. The influx of rich, white residents caused problems for Nola, a cash-strapped artist, and her neighbors of color: The newest Fort Greene dwellers called the police on them and one of Nola’s neighborhood friends was incarcerated toward the end of the season after being misidentified as the perpetrator of anti-gentrification vandalism.
In this, the series offered a fairly straightforward critique of gentrification: White newcomers, especially young people with access to their parents’ finances, displace longtime black residents and cause material damage in the process. But Lee’s relationship to the phenomenon is not nearly that simple. Asked about his own role in commercializing black Brooklyn (from his new post in the Upper East Side, no less) in 2017, Lee defaulted to name-checking Do the Right Thing as evidence of his ostensible wokeness:

Spike Lee Is The Reason Why Fort Greene Is Gentrified? Get Da Fuck Outta Here With Da Bullshit. There Had To Be White Flight First For Gentrification To Happen. FACT. I Wrote A Scene (Way Back In 1988) About Gentrification In DO THE RIGHT THING Which Featured The Actor JOHN SAVAGE. FACT. So Your Questions/Narrative Are WACK!!!!

Last year, after reports surfaced that Lee had accepted $200,000 for his work on a New York Police Department PR campaign in 2016, the director Boots Riley called Lee’s Oscar-winning 2018 film, BlacKkKlansman, “a made-up story in which the false parts of it try to make a cop the protagonist in the fight against racist oppression.” Lee didn’t reply to Riley directly, but he did express frustration at those who question his ability to portray social dynamics affecting black people.

The indignation Lee displayed when his claim to black artistic dominion was questioned, even slightly, seems to manifest in various storylines of She’s Gotta Have It’s second season. The show takes easy swipes at white developers and arts patrons, but deploys its contempt in other directions as well. Perhaps most baffling is its apparent inability to imagine the subjectivity of non-American black people, including Brooklyn residents and artists. Papo Da Mayor (played by Elvis Nolasco), the neighbor who was arrested alongside Nola in Season 1, reappears early in the new season. She’s Gotta Have It makes him the subject of a brief interview that Nola conducts using her shiny new camera: Papo tells Nola that he would now like to be called “Divine,” a shift that occurred during his 18 months in prison because “I learned that I’m more than just Dominican; I’m a black man.”

If Papo served as a symbol of native-Brooklynian authenticity in the show’s first season, here Lee makes the curious choice to have the character spurred into a new consciousness only by incarceration—despite the fact that Papo presumably lived alongside other Afro-Latinos and black people of many backgrounds in his home borough. And Divine is not the only black man on the series who has a delayed racial awakening. Halfway through the new season, Nola meets a British Nigerian artist at Nation Time, the exclusive retreat for black artists that she’s selected to attend. The West African sculptor, a veritable mishmash of stereotypes about the continent, predictably catches Nola’s eye. Thus begins a multi-episode arc so tedious, it makes Will Smith’s Concussion accent sound like a lullaby.

The most important thing that viewers learn about Olumide Owoye (played by Michael Luwoye), Nola’s Nigerian beau, is that Nola believes he sculpts with “cow dung to reflect the prickly relationship between the black male visage and the white gaze’s distrust and enticement of it.” In one scene, she watches him construct one of his ostensibly African-inspired works in the nude; the visual cliche is never explained. Later, Nola tells him, “I’m not mad at Chewy-toy Ijeda-tofu. I’m not mad at John Puerto Rican Bodega,” hideous butcherings of “Chiwetel Ejiofor” and “John Boyega,” the names of two prominent British Nigerian actors (the latter has pithily weighed in on the line via Twitter). Olu, whom the series depicts clad in Ghanaian kente cloth despite his being from Nigeria, laughs as he tells her to stop messing up their names. Nola’s response, like much of her dialogue, sounds painfully like Spike Lee:

You know I’m just being slightly shady. Point is, I agree with my brother, Samuel L. You London blokes need to fall back and fall away from taking all of our roles. Like we have dope, talented, trained, qualified black actors right here in the States. And at the end of the day, black Brits just come cheaper.

Rather than explore any of the complex reasons black British actors aspire to American entertainment gigs—or question the larger gatekeeping apparatus that keeps all black people fighting for a handful of opportunities—the show’s writing doubles down on ahistorical condescension. Nola tells Olu, a black man raised in a country where most black people are the descendants of West Indian enslaved people, that Britain also participated in the slave trade. “You and your manz and your fellow black British blokes didn’t come out of the shit unscathed,” she retorts (the Netflix captions spell manz with a z and fufu, a common Nigerian culinary staple, as “foofoo”). “You just have Stockholm syndrome and fell in love with your captors.”
Olu, instead of rebutting her statements, tells Nola he loves her “fearlessness.” The two proceed to have sex. She’s Gotta Have It allows Nola’s insular worldview, which sounds suspiciously more like that of a middle-aged man anxious about his place in the entertainment world than that of a young Brooklyn woman, to go unchallenged. (Nola’s derivative art, with its many references to only the most overt forms of American racial violence, is regularly framed as inventive work; here, too, the show feels outdated at best.) The show’s treatment of Olu, who has a Yoruba name despite being written as the descendant of Fulani nomads, remains hackneyed throughout the season. In a particularly fetishistic scene, as Olu gives a speech at Brooklyn’s Museum of Contemporary African Diasporan Arts, he’s heckled by a woman who calls him “Mr. Coming to America.”She’s Gotta Have It also has yet to shake its strangely regressive view of women. The series presents mawkish lines of dialogue that seem more like placeholder text than words people might actually say to each other. (In one scene, Nola is in bed with a woman named Opal Gilstrap; the latter punctuates their post-coital bliss with the painful sentence, “Nola Darling, you’ve been Opal Gilstrapped.”) The show is also palpably judgmental of women whose decisions fall outside the Instagram-ready shenanigans Nola gets herself into. Shemekka, a friend of Nola’s whose butt implants literally exploded in Season 1, once again serves as little more than a sentient warning: All viewers see her do is either liaise with a curiously accented character from Brownsville (played by Fat Joe), wistfully pine after a new job at a hair salon, or lament her botched surgery. Shemekka never gets justice.
Frustratingly—and unsurprisingly—She’s Gotta Have It’s most amusing character remains Mars Blackmon. Played by Anthony Ramos in the series, the character was embodied by Lee himself in the original film. In Season 2, Mars gets precious little screen time—despite a promising gentrification plotline—and when he does appear, his fizzy energy is too often lost amid buzzy repartee that mimics Twitter threads (indeed, all the episode titles are hashtagged). The resulting mess feels like a chore to watch, with chants like “Reclaiming our time!” meant to appeal to the same kinds of viewers who are most likely to reject aesthetic allusions as signifiers of principle.



There are plenty of ways in which Bi Gan’s new film, Long Day’s Journey Into Night, resembles a superhero blockbuster. It’s epically long—two hours and 20 minutes, just a little shorter than the last Avengers movie. It requires 3-D glasses, though only for a specific section of the film. And upon its release in China in 2018, it broke box-office records, earning more money in pre-sales than any of the year’s other biggest hits. But Long Day’s Journey Into Night, which arrives in U.S. theaters starting this weekend, is an esoteric piece of avant-garde storytelling, one that will likely require multiple viewings, and maybe some intense note-taking, for audiences to untangle.

The plot of Long Day’s Journey, which has nothing to do with the Eugene O’Neill play of the same name, centers on three characters: Luo (played by Huang Jue), a man haunted by his time as a youth in 2000; Luo’s long-lost lover, Wan Qiwen (Tang Wei); and a childhood pal named Wildcat, who was murdered. Roughly 20 years after Wildcat’s death, Luo tries to find Qiwen again and dig into the mystery of what happened between them decades prior. But any simple explanation for what’s going on is never offered. As Long Day’s Journey progresses, its meaning becomes more elusive, and its narrative strands stubbornly refuse to tie together.

How did such a strange project make an astounding $38 million on its release day of December 31, 2018? In the same way so many of its big-budget rivals did throughout the year—with good marketing. According to industry reports, the film was rolled out in China as a romantic epic, a perfect date movie for the last night of 2018. Screenings were timed so that the film ended precisely at midnight. And because its closing image is of two lovers kissing, Long Day’s Journey Into Night was promoted as a movie that would offer viewers the ideal cue to kiss their own partner right as the new year began.





Three weeks after its triumphant opening night, the movie vanished from box-office charts with a total gross of $41 million, meaning it made almost all of its money on December 31. The hashtag “can’t understand Long Day’s Journey Into Night” trended on social media, while users of the ticketing platform Maoyan flooded it with bad reviews for the film, which received an aggregate rating of 2.8 out of 10. Still, the movie is an undeniable success, grossing much more than art films from more established, less aggressively cryptic directors such as Jia Zhangke (whose Ash Is Purest White made about $10 million in 2018). Long Day’s Journey isn’t being marketed in the U.S. with the same kind of “must-see” gimmick, but it’s a singular theatrical experience that’s worth setting aside the time for—even if you end up as confused as the romantically inclined theatergoers who saw it on New Year’s Eve.

The film’s success is even more surprising when you consider that the director wasn’t already a big name in China. Bi is a 29-year-old, self-taught filmmaker who made his first short movie at the age of 19; five years later, he debuted his film Kaili Blues at festivals around the world and immediately became a talent to watch. The 2015 mystery drama was a meditative journey through southwestern China, following a man who moves through weird environments in the past and future on a quest to find his nephew. The story was set in Bi’s hometown, the agricultural city of Kaili in China’s southwestern Guizhou province—a territory of lush forests and farms that’s relatively overlooked in Chinese cinema. The director himself has acknowledged how unusual it is for a filmmaker to emerge from that part of the country. “In Kaili, Guizhou, if you said you wanted to be a TV host, or an artist, there were classes you can attend,” he said in a short documentary available on the Criterion Channel. “But if you want to be a film director, there’s no way forward for you in Kaili. Film schools are so far away.”

Like Kaili Blues, Long Day’s Journey Into Night is a surreal reverie set in Guizhou, but it’s a major step forward for Bi in terms of budget, star power, and sheer scope. I could describe everything that happens in Long Day’s Journey Into Night without spoiling the experience at all. The film unfolds through mostly baffling storytelling, with scenes that aren’t meant to be pieced together into a linear narrative. Instead, the viewer should soak up Bi’s gift for stark imagery: The first half of the film is spent visiting beautiful locations and is filled with long, slow shots of, say, a truck passing through a tunnel, or a glass rattling across a table as a train rumbles by.

In the film’s second half, the action coalesces in the most bizarre way. Luo decides to see a movie by himself, so he goes to a ratty theater and puts on a pair of 3-D glasses. That’s the signal to the audience to don their own glasses in preparation for Bi’s bravura finale. The last shot of the movie is a 59-minute unbroken take that follows Luo through several dreamlike environments as he encounters much of the film’s cast and travels through locales such as an abandoned mine shaft and a run-down prison. It’s a feat of choreography and visual acuity that’s astonishing to behold, even though it’s as enigmatic as the rest of the film.

Given the movie’s art-house rollout in the U.S., Bi might not see the same record-setting box-office success as he did in China. But that doesn’t make his sophomore effort any less significant.  Long Day’s Journey Into Night is aesthetically driven in all the right ways—it’s not a swooning blockbuster romance, but a gorgeous and impossible puzzle of a project, something to be pondered long after seeing it.



There oughta be a word for whatever emotion that The National has homed in on over eight excellent albums of gravel-voiced poetry and delicate-ferocious rock. Consulting Mental Floss’s 2016 guide “How to Tell Whether You’ve Got Angst, Ennui, or Weltschmerz,” one might hear all three highbrow, non-anglophone feelings on the band’s latest release, I Am Easy to Find:

But those strains of bummed-ness comprise only part of The National’s vibe. The Cincinnati-Brooklyn quintet, arguably the band of this millennium to most consistently balance gut impact and brainy appeal, usually garnish their wallowing with a dignified strut. Previous albums had knotty and glowering arrangements stiffening into great crescendos that hinted at transcendence. For I Am Easy to Find, something else happens. New voices and unexpected directions beckon as ways out of darkness. A softer approach somehow renders the contours of Berninger’s crises more concrete.

The album arrives less than two years after 2017’s fidgety, political Sleep Well Beast and germinates from an unusual process. Around the time of Beast’s release, the filmmaker Mike Mills (Thumbsucker, Beginners, 20th Century Women) reached out to collaborate. Some songs once intended for that earlier album were rerouted to a new project, one that Mills contributed songwriting and arranging to. He also shot a short film with snippets of the resulting music. Starring Alicia Vikander, it compresses a woman’s journey from birth to death, Up-like.

The movie’s concept speaks to The National’s particular attention to the feminine on this album. In a rare move, the singular-sounding Berninger duets with other singers, all women—Gail Ann Dorsey, Mina Tindle, Lisa Hannigan, Sharon Van Etten, Kate Stables, Eve Owen—plus the Brooklyn Youth Chorus. Often, just when the listener expects a standard-issue rock climax, the female singers enter a song and guide it to a hymnlike denouement. Or they sing with Berninger, his low growl acting as the sturdy wire in a drape of fine gauze. Or the women lead the song from the start, rendering Berninger’s lyrical ideas as something other than those of a classic sad boy.

The way Berninger’s esoteric phrases repeat across kaleidoscopic tones recalls the modern classical composers that The National’s Aaron and Bryce Dessner hang out with. The effect is thoroughly beautiful, even if it frequently comes at the cost of The National’s anthemic qualities. The rangy, polyphonic approach fits with the album’s deeper shift, too. Ever self-interrogating, Berninger may lately be wondering whether scraping his own skull eventually yields diminishing returns. Even to a helpless fan of his like me, there’s something parodic and off-putting when, on “Not in Kansas,” his anxiety takes the form of listing artists he’s been digging lately (R.E.M., Hanne Darboven, Roberta Flack). The song’s saved by Dorsey, Hannigan, and Stables intruding to tenderly promise the apocalypse. The story, it’s clear, is bigger than Berninger.

Indeed, the story is often about wondering at someone else’s story: a lover’s, a child’s, a stranger’s. In Mills’s film, Vikander goes through rites of life—school, marriage, illness—as onscreen text notes milestones both tidy (“Learning to read, learning to write”) and abstract (“Aware that her body is separate”). Maybe there’s something softly condescending about this male filmmaker and this male band imagining and marveling at a female experience. But their greater interest is in the genderless arc of life, the epiphanies that everyone shares, and the inevitability of ups and downs.

“Hey Rosey, I think I know just what the feeling is,” goes one of the more hopeful-sounding choruses. It’s one of a few times that Berninger mentions some unnameable thing he aches to have in common with someone else. He gestures to and describes that thing, but never defines it. Over the fluttery kraut-rock of “Oblivions,” there’s this heart-stabbing verse:

It’s the way you say yes when I ask you to marry me
You don’t know what you are doing
Do you think you can carry me over this threshold
Over and over again into oblivion?
It’s the way that you’re gonna stop needing to tell me
You want me as much as I want you to tell me
I’m over the threshold
Everything is gonna be totally okay into oblivion

Oblivion is another word for loss, which beckons constantly in these songs. But the outlook is the same as on Sleep Well Beast, an album putatively about divorce that was co-written (as was I Am Easy To Find) by Carin Besser, the woman Berninger’s happily married to. Fearing endings but also making peace with them, building relationships with the assurance of their deterioration—those are the paradoxes this band constantly turns over. “There’s a million little battles that I’m never gonna win anyway,” Berninger sings on the title track. “I’m still waiting for you every night with ticker tape.” What to call such wearied determination? Wabi-sabi? Sehnsucht? Maybe you don’t need a word, just a sound, and to that end The National has expanded the language.



There’s a moment about 15 minutes into the first episode of Years and Years that made me gasp at its audacity, its prescience, its visual horror. The new six-part series from the British writer Russell T. Davies (Doctor Who, A Very English Scandal) charts the life of the Lyons family over the course of 15 years, starting in 2019 and ending in 2034. It’s a kitchen-sink saga that barrels its way through births and marriages and betrayals, but also through the near-future. In 2024, Stephen Lyons (played by Rory Kinnear), a financial adviser, is at home with his wife, Celeste (T’nia Miller), both rushing their way through the morning routine. When the camera turns to their teenage daughter Bethany (Lydia West), her face isn’t recognizably human. Instead, she looks like a 3-D version of a Snapchat puppy, with vast cartoon eyes, wagging pink ears, and a brown snout. When she talks, her voice is grotesquely distorted, a robotic hallucination of a child’s cadence. “I might have to start limiting filter time,” Celeste says in the same exasperated, noncommittal way that you might think, I really should spend less time on Twitter.

This is the way dystopia happens, Years and Years says: Not with a bang, but with a series of exhausted shrugs. The sight of Bethany’s augmented-reality features—projected over her face by the two thin bands of a headset she tucks behind her ears—isn’t jarring because it’s improbable. It’s alarming because it’s too plausible for comfort.

Davies, who’s long been a funny, generous chronicler of human foibles and frailty in the present, is also a spookily deft prognosticator, it turns out. And the anxious thrill of watching Years and Years—which debuts on HBO Monday—comes not only from seeing the future unfurl in front of you, but also from watching how it ripples through the lives of this very modern, delightfully fractious family. Sometimes the changes are practical: At the start of the series, the Lyons siblings have to text and call each other to communicate, while a few years later, they’re all connected via an Alexa-like virtual assistant called “Signor.”

Sometimes the societal shifts are more treacherous, as when abstract-seeming developments around the world lead to events that put family members in grave danger. It isn’t all bad. When the second episode aired on BBC a month ago, it included a scene in which Rosie Lyons (Ruth Madeley), who has spina bifida, tells her family that medical advances have enabled doctors to repair spinal defects while babies are still in utero. (Just this week, the Cleveland Clinic announced that a team of surgeons had managed to do exactly that for the first time in medical history.)

Davies interweaves the story of the Lyonses with the political ascendance of a populist leader named Vivienne Rook, played with grim Mancunian relish by Emma Thompson. Though she only directly interacts with the family members a handful of times, Rook (or “Viv,” as she quickly becomes known around the U.K.) is part and parcel of their lives, a symptom and a stoker of discontent across the country. In the first episode, Rook, an entrepreneur, is appearing on a BBC politics show when she launches into a profane tirade about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict overriding issues she insists matter more to British people: parking, litter, trash collection. The audience is electrified. The Lyonses frantically text one another their thoughts while Rook trends nationwide. At the end of her rant, she looks at the camera with a glint in her eye, and says, “I have got you listening now, haven’t I?” Soon enough, she’s running for office.

As Rook’s political fortunes rise, the Lyonses fall victim to the same circumstances that are leading voters to embrace Rook: financial crises, floods of refugees, a standoff between the U.S. (led by President Donald Trump in his second term) and China. The pace of change is breathtaking. Daniel Lyons (Russell Tovey), who’s married to Ralph (Dino Fetscher), works with Ukrainians seeking political asylum from draconian anti-LGBTQ laws, which draws him into the orbit of the magnetic refugee Viktor (Maxim Baldry). Stephen and Celeste try to come to terms with revelations about Bethany’s identity. Rosie, an early fan of Rook’s, supports her even more fiercely after technological developments phase Rosie out of the workplace. Edith (Jessica Hynes), an activist, returns home after conflict overseas threatens her health. As the show proceeds, characters refer casually to other eventualities: butterflies have disappeared, bananas don’t grow anymore, all teenagers now have mandatory sexual-awareness imaging control classes in school.

The brittle, nervy feeling of watching Years and Years is amped up by stylistic choices, like the heavy-handed crescendoing score of a children’s choir every time things start falling apart. It also comes from simple recognition. In 2011, when the dark speculative series Black Mirror debuted on Channel 4, its creator, Charlie Brooker, wrote an article for The Guardian about what he most wanted the show to achieve. “We routinely do things,” he wrote, “that just five years ago would scarcely have made sense to us.” Black Mirror, once so prescient that it imagined a buffoonish TV character being elected prime minister, has struggled to stay ahead of a reality evolving faster than Brooker can apparently imagine. Its most recent episodes dealt with scenarios playing out not in some wildly speculative future, but in the present: addictive social-media platforms, holograms, the exploitation of celebrities’ images without their consent.

Years and Years, by contrast, sees the darkest trends of the past decade and takes them to their logical extension five (or 15) years from now. It maps out how easy it is for a politician like Rook to catapult her way into power by appealing to nativist instincts, but also the absurdity of focusing on local grievances rather than catastrophic global crises that threaten everyone. Thompson is brilliantly menacing as Rook, communicating her absolute self-certainty, along with just enough ambiguity to make you wonder if power is everything she’s after. In a world this unpredictable, who can tell?



This story contains spoilers for all seven seasons of Game of Thrones.

So here we are: Seven seasons and 67 episodes of Game of Thrones are in the rearview mirror. Only a half a dozen are still ahead of us, with the eighth and final season starting Sunday. Where do things stand?

The Night King and his army of the dead have breached the Wall, thanks to a conveniently mislaid and reanimated dragon, and they’re headed south to kill everyone. Jon Snow has pledged fealty to would-be Queen Daenerys Targaryen, and the two have united to face the encroaching undead threat. What we know, though they don’t, is that Jon is himself (a) a Targaryen, (b) the rightful heir to the Iron Throne, and (c) Daenerys’s nephew—which makes the fact that the two jumped into the sack in last season’s finale simultaneously awkward and a very Targaryen thing to have done. Jon’s presumed (but not actual) half sisters, Sansa and Arya Stark, are running Winterfell in his absence and have yet to be informed of any of these developments.  

Cersei Lannister agreed to help in the war of the living against the dead but, being Cersei, she lied and is planning to backstab her putative allies just as soon as Euron Greyjoy’s fleet ferries her over an army of mercenaries from Essos. This betrayal proved too much for her brother/lover Jaime—yes, there’s plenty of incest to go around at this point—who’s abandoned her in order to keep his word and head north to fight the good fight.

That might sound like a lot, but in Thrones terms, it’s remarkably straightforward. The last time one could get up to date on the HBO show’s principal plots in just a couple of paragraphs was probably way back in Season 2.

But perhaps it’s better to ask not where we are, but how we got here and what we have to look forward to. And that’s where things get rather more complicated.

Game of Thrones has by this point progressed far beyond its source material, the famously unfinished—and almost certain to remain unfinished—novel series A Song of Ice and Fire, by George R. R. Martin. And though Martin provided the showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss with a general map of where his saga was intended to go, they’ve increasingly had to chart their own course. In so doing, they’ve corrected some of the errors of Martin’s diffuse and meandering later books. Along the way, they’ve done some marvelous writing of their own: Littlefinger’s “Chaos is a ladder” speech; the Hound’s tavern disquisition on chickens, Tyrion’s tale of “cousin Orson,” and on and on. But they’ve also shown, ever more conclusively, that when it comes to plotting, they can’t hold a candle to prime Martin.

This has been a concern going back as far as Season 2, when Benioff and Weiss took an uncharacteristically lame Martin subplot in the eastern city of Qarth and replaced it with … a subplot just as lame. In the otherwise exemplary Seasons 3 and 4, the showrunners’ fondness for ramping up their saga’s extreme sex and violence led them to take Ramsay Snow/Bolton—a sociopath whom we heard of only secondhand in the books—and place him grotesquely, yet tediously, center stage.

The plotting continued to stumble in Seasons 5 and 6, as Benioff and Weiss were forced to depart from the books and strike out on their own, with Martin’s loose blueprint forming a flimsy net. Many of the new story lines were irredeemably silly (Jaime and Bronn’s rescue mission in Dorne, and pretty much everything to do with the Sand Snakes) or poorly executed (the Faith Militant’s almost instantaneous takeover of King’s Landing; Stannis Baratheon’s abrupt moral collapse).

But Season 7—the penultimate season, which aired in 2017—is when Game of Thrones seemed as though it might have finally jumped the shark … or dragon, as the case may be. It began with Euron Greyjoy—the contested ruler of a fourth-tier, much-subjugated “kingdom”—using a fleet he built in approximately five minutes (on islands explicitly devoid of lumber) to destroy not one but two of the greatest armadas ever seen in Westeros. This was followed up by the single dimmest narrative thread of the whole series, in which seven principal or semi-principal characters embarked North of the Wall on a suicide mission to capture a wight, which they intended to take to Cersei to persuade her to join them in the war against the White Walkers.

Now, anyone who’s watched the show at all—let alone the hatcher of the plan, her brother Tyrion—should have known immediately that this was precisely the opposite of how Cersei would respond. (And indeed, after several tedious reversals—more on this below—she wound up exactly where we all knew she would: grateful that the dead would help destroy her northern enemies while she attacked them from behind.) Even apart from its abject failure to achieve its stated goal, this imbecile mission supplied the Night King with his very own ice dragon! (This, of course, raised the unaddressed question of how he had intended to overcome the Wall before our heroes gifted him a zombie Viserion.)

As if that was not enough, Season 7 ended with a death that might as well have been a metaphor for the show itself: that of Petyr “Littlefinger” Baelish. At its best—and throughout its earlier seasons—Game of Thrones was, right down to its title, a grim joke, an extended subversion of the fantasy genre. Forget your brave knights and strong rulers. The true players of the game were the behind-the-scenes schemers, many of them misfits of one kind or another: Tyrion the dwarf, Varys the eunuch, Littlefinger the low-born. Who actually sat on the Iron Throne was secondary (Robert? Joffrey? Tommen?). What was important was who had influence over them. Never did this become more apparent than when Tywin Lannister was crossbowed on the privy at the end of Season 4. He’d never worn the crown, but he was the longtime shadow ruler of the realm as, among other roles, hand of the king and father of the queen. It was his death—not Robert’s, not Joffrey’s—that truly broke the Seven Kingdoms. Without him, the center could no longer hold: Dorne rebelled. Highgarden rebelled. The Lannister mystique was shattered.

Littlefinger was Tywin’s ignoble twin: also a true, if unheralded, architect of Westeros, who was once described, modestly, as worth more than 10,000 fighting men. He single-handedly initiated the War of the Five Kings: framing the Lannisters for the death of Jon Arryn (actually accomplished by Arryn’s wife, Lysa, at Littlefinger’s instigation), and then framing them again for the dagger attack on Bran Stark in Winterfell. Then he planned and enlisted Highgarden in the regicide of the Purple Wedding. By the time he was done, three of the great families of Westeros—Baratheons, Starks, Lannisters—were all but decimated.

Yet after multiple seasons of aggressive narrative diminution—the idea that Littlefinger married Sansa Stark to Ramsay Bolton without knowing that the latter was a psychosexual sadist was among the most idiotic plots of the show—he died almost as an afterthought, his throat slit by Arya Stark, following a “trial” that viewers had been led to expect would be hers. Here, again, Benioff and Weiss disappointed: Every crime that Sansa cited for Littlefinger’s execution was one she had been aware of for a very long time. Yet we endured scene after scene of escalating tension between Sansa and Arya (real? feigned? does it even matter?) specifically so that we could be “surprised” when it was ultimately Littlefinger being judged rather than Arya. Again: Sansa could have had Littlefinger executed at any time without all this elaborate sisterly rigmarole. It was there to trick us, the viewers, rather than anyone in Winterfell.

This is the precise type of shallow reversal in which Game of Thrones has indulged more and more frequently. Forget the “way too much like Batman v. Superman” resurrection of Jon Snow in Season 6. When Dany and Drogon attacked the Lannister loot train returning from Highgarden, it appeared that Jaime would be roasted. But no! Bronn saved him, only to have him apparently sink to the bottom of a deep river to drown. But no! Bronn saved him again—though how we’re to believe he pulled a fully armored knight from the watery depths is beyond me. Likewise, on the mission beyond the Wall, Thoros was apparently dead, then he wasn’t, then he was. Tormund appeared to be killed, then wasn’t. And I could hardly keep track of how many times Jon seemed to die—like Jaime, he returned from a presumed drowning—only to receive an implausible last-minute reprieve. In short, Season 7 was one cheesy narrative fake-out after another.

So what does this mean for Season 8? I have no more knowledge of what Benioff and Weiss have in store than any other viewer, let alone of what Martin might have intended back in the days when we could all pretend he was actually going to finish the series. But I presume Game of Thrones will continue its shift away from narrative subtlety in favor of large-scale action sequences (its execution of which, to be fair, has become quite accomplished). The show’s central subversion—that plotters outweigh warriors—will continue to recede. Littlefinger and Tywin are dead, after all. Tyrion hasn’t had a good idea in seasons now (truce with the slaver cities? sneak attack on Casterly Rock? let’s go snatch a zombie?). Varys has all but vanished. And Cersei, as her father would be happy to remind her if he were still alive, was never as good at the game as she thought she was. Genius will thus be replaced by genealogy, in the persons of Jon and Dany. (And perhaps Tyrion? His being revealed as a secret Targaryen would be a late and poorly set-up twist—though, again, that may now be the norm—but there are reasons to believe that Tywin was not his actual father, and it’s worth noting that the Targaryens historically flew in threes.)

Game of Thrones has been an extraordinary television adaptation of an extraordinary novel series. But as the former has moved beyond the latter, it has become less a cunning reimagining of the classic post-Tolkien epic and more precisely the kind of generic sword-and-sorcery epic it initially seemed engineered to subvert. I, as much as anyone, would be thrilled if Season 8 could surprise us anew.



This post contains spoilers through Season 8, Episode 5 of Game of Thrones.

Daenerys Targaryen, first of her name, has spent more than seven seasons of Game of Thrones accumulating power aided by a quirk of biology and magic: Her children have doubled as weapons of mass destruction. In “The Bells,” the penultimate episode of the series, the ruler who would be queen of the Seven Kingdoms brought that fact to a horrifically literal conclusion. She chose the nuclear option. Riding—wielding—Drogon, Daenerys thoroughly dracarysed King’s Landing, burning noncombatants alive and ensuring that many others would be crushed under the toppled stones of buildings felled by dragon fire.

There are many ways to interpret that monstrous turn of events. You could read it, in a show that is deeply concerned with questions of nature and nurture, as the forces of genetic inheritance exerting their inevitable gravities: “The gods flip a coin,” Cersei observed of the Targaryens, and here is Dany’s, breaking mad. You could read Dany’s behavior as well, in a series that has often failed in its treatment of would-be queens, as an endorsement of tired and dangerous tropes about manipulative women, and emotional women, and ambitious women. You could read it as a person, reeling from rejection and grief, acting out on her heartbreak. You could read it as yet more evidence of pacing problems: the story the writers want to tell whittled down to the story they have time for, resulting in an arc that, for Dany, scans as a sharply jerking parabola.

What is striking about Daenerys’s newly Walter White–inflected trajectory, though—and what also saves an episode that is otherwise punctured with plot holes—is that you can read it in so many ways. Maybe her decision is the result of madness—the apple settling, after all this time, right at the trunk of the tree—or maybe it’s … ruthlessness. Maybe she got the crazy edit, yes; or maybe the leader who has justified so much under the auspices of the broken wheel has answered a Westerosi version of the trolley problem, deciding that some innocents must die in the present so that many more can live peacefully in the future. Or maybe, having recently lost her second dragon and the apparent loyalty of those left in her orbit, she simply made a blunt calculation about power and what will be required to attain it. Rhaegalpolitik: “Let it be fear,” Dany tells Jon, before making all too good on her word.

Ambiguity is a powerful tool in storytelling; it is also a difficult one to wield well. While the writers and showrunners of Game of Thrones have not always landed on the right side of things, the uncertainty in this case provides its own kind of conclusion. Here is the horror lurking in the fiery rubble of King’s Landing: Whether Dany acted out of a lost mind or a cruelly sharp one makes no difference in the end. The effect of either is precisely the same. Innocent people, crushed and snuffed and burned. Terror, raining from the sky. Game of Thrones has always operated on two levels: political intrigue on the one hand and horror on the other, King’s Landing here and the Night King there. In “The Bells,” though, just as one element has apparently resolved—the ghosts defeated by heartfelt humanity—a new threat has come. And it is all the worse because it has emerged from the side of the humans. Dany is a savior, and Dany is a monster, and it is impossible to know where one ends and the other begins.

In that foundational ambiguity, there is despair. This is what happens, after all, when individual leaders accumulate strength that refuses to be questioned or moderated: Everyday people become subject, in the most intimate of ways, to the workings of leaderly minds and hearts and spleens. The world and its inhabitants get shaped by the fickle emotions of the powerful. The outlines of the known world exist as they do because Robert Baratheon, all flesh and fiery synapse, was so deeply in love with Lyanna Stark that he couldn’t imagine—couldn’t allow himself to believe—that she would leave him for Rhaegar Targaryen. Robert warred, he told himself, in the name of love, and he bent the fate of the Seven Kingdoms as he battled. The history of our own world, of course, has been shaped in similar ways: by misunderstandings, by insults, by vengeance that is backed by the weapons of war. He “tried to kill my dad,” George W. Bush said of Saddam Hussein, and the common folk are living, still, with the consequences.

Daenerys’s own weapon cruises over the homes and businesses and lives of King’s Landing, toppling towers and breathing fire, and the scenes that follow—the aftermath of the carnage—are uncomfortably familiar: the rubble. The smoke. The blanket of ash covering the dead and the survivors alike. The Clegane brothers, their broken bodies tangled, plummeting to the chaos below. The sense that history has been altered, irrevocably, on its path. Arya, bloodied and covered in the dust of destruction, awakens from unconsciousness and surveys the scene that surrounds her. Ash flutters down from above, and the airborne remnants of dragon fire resemble, at certain angles, snow. By way of the leader who helped to defeat the army of the dead, another kind of winter has come.

The Night King could not be reasoned with, because the Night King was a kind of monster; Daenerys could not be reasoned with, for reasons that remain unclear. The illegibility of her motivations is itself uncannily resonant. Americans are living in a moment in which the notoriously fickle presidential mood becomes the stuff of breaking news, and in which tyrants and despots around the world keep their own fiery dragons in wait. Are those shapers of the human arc angry? Are they insulted? Are they strategic? Are they sane? That these are the questions that have to be asked—and that the asking will make so little difference—is the horror at the heart of it all. Logic won’t always win. Justice won’t always save the day. You can stop the wheel. You can break the wheel. You can even incinerate the wheel. But the wheel, as long as it is propelled by human folly, will find a way to keep on spinning.



The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) announced a series of rule changes on Tuesday. The move came after months of sound and fury over the growing domination of Netflix in the world of movie awards, as well as reports that the industry titan Steven Spielberg was amassing forces to take on the streaming company. The biggest of the Oscar changes? The category for Best Makeup and Hairstyling will now have five nominees instead of three. Rumblings about a proposed rule that would keep streaming films out of awards contention unless they committed to a theatrical-release “window” ended up amounting to nothing.

Spielberg had become the poster boy for a proposal that would have required Netflix to release its films exclusively in cinemas for 28 days before putting them online. In March, trade publications such as Variety and The Hollywood Reporter claimed that Spielberg was seeking support from the Academy’s Board of Governors for such a rule. Though the director had in the past aired his concerns about the overwhelming strength of Netflix and the company’s disinterest in promoting a theater experience, he didn’t comment publicly as the newer reports began to spread. He also wasn’t present at the Academy’s recent meeting, petitioned for nothing, and, at least according to The New York Times, never really had major beef with Netflix in the first place.

Instead, Spielberg is “frustrated that exhibitors have been unwilling to compromise,” the Times reported. “I want people to find their entertainment in any form or fashion that suits them … I want to see the survival of movie theaters. I want the theatrical experience to remain relevant in our culture,” the director said in an email to the Times. When I wrote about the concept of a 28-day theatrical window in March, I noted that it seemed like a last-ditch effort at negotiation between the streaming site (which prefers to release films in theaters and online simultaneously) and major theater chains (which still insist on a 90-day window of exclusivity).

Netflix clearly cares about the Oscars—it spent tens of millions on its campaign for Roma, which this year netted a Best Director trophy, among others. An AMPAS rule change demanding proper theatrical runs for eligible movies might have been enough to force Netflix to the bargaining table, though theater chains would also have to make concessions. But the reality is that the movie business has already transformed too much for the Oscars to singlehandedly make Netflix change its entire strategy. The mere suggestion of this kind of rule change prompted the Department of Justice to send a very odd letter to AMPAS warning of potential antitrust violations. No matter what major exhibitors might think, Netflix is a prominent studio that works with well-liked artists, churns out a lot of well-reviewed films, and is a new member of the Motion Picture Association of America.

Essentially, Netflix is part of the Hollywood firmament. AMPAS President John Bailey still stressed in a statement on the Academy’s meeting that the theatrical experience matters to the Board of Governors, though he didn’t mention the streaming service by name. “We support the theatrical experience as integral to the art of motion pictures, and this weighed heavily in our discussions,” he said. “Our rules currently require theatrical exhibition, and also allow for a broad selection of films to be submitted for Oscars consideration. We plan to further study the profound changes occurring in our industry and continue discussions with our members about these issues.”

Current Oscar rules require only a one-week theatrical run in a commercial Los Angeles theater, with three screenings a day, for a movie to qualify for awards. That’s no issue for Netflix, which simply pays theaters to exhibit its releases, renting the room and paying up front for the screenings, a practice known as “four-walling.” For now, the Academy appears happy to keep things the way they are, though Bailey’s statement did have enough caveats about “further study” to keep the streaming company on its toes. Spielberg, meanwhile, will get to work on his latest film, a remake of West Side Story; according to the Times, he’s an avid Netflix user who binge-watches just like everyone else.

The new rules actually taken up by the Academy are mostly cosmetic changes to the annual ceremony. The expansion of the Best Makeup and Hairstyling category, which has always been limited to three nominees, seemed only fair, given that practically every other category honors at least five films. The category of Best Foreign Language Film has been retitled to Best International Feature Film because AMPAS “noted that the reference to ‘Foreign’ is outdated within the global filmmaking community,” said Larry Karaszewski and Diane Weyermann, who are co-chairs of the category’s committee.

Additionally, the Oscars will air earlier in 2020, on February 9, moving up three weeks from the ceremony’s traditional spot in an attempt to shorten the grueling length of campaign season. The Academy also announced that the ceremony would begin at 6:30 p.m. ET, an hour earlier than usual, which may help address ABC’s concerns about the length of the broadcast, which led to controversy this year. These small, logical steps should help the Oscars remain popular in the future. But the Academy’s governors clearly recognized that the best way to stay relevant is to keep Netflix as an ally, rather than creating further conflict.



On Sunday mornings in the 1970s, I was the first in my house to wake up. As soon as I got out of bed, I’d retrieve the thick Sunday edition of the newspaper, pull out the comics section, and then dig for the weekly TV guide. I’d flip to the listing for the following Saturday to see which monster movies would be part of that morning’s “Creature Features.” Any film would’ve thrilled me, but I was always hoping for ones starring the heavy-footed, radioactive behemoth known as Godzilla. Having first debuted in Ishiro Honda’s 1954 film Gojira, the Godzilla I knew was an unpredictable force of destruction. But he could also sometimes be a friend to humanity—a savior in moments of crisis, a mythological titan that danced when he won a battle.

Godzilla movies have typically tried to highlight both of these qualities—often in the same film—with varying degrees of emphasis. Many of the movies in the 1970s were almost comical, featuring kaiju (giant monster) battles that resembled professional wrestling. The films of the mid-’80s through ’90s took on a much darker tone, with Godzilla reemerging as a menace even as he delighted in his fights with other monsters. His power was fearsome, and he couldn’t be controlled or negotiated with. Nevertheless, when a bigger threat to humanity’s survival emerged, Godzilla would rise as our champion. No matter how playful or haunting his movies have been over the decades, this duality—Godzilla as both a terrifying metaphor for mankind’s hubris and a protector capable of almost cosmic benevolence—has always been at the heart of the character.

Hollywood’s latest Godzilla movie, subtitled King of the Monsters, is set to maintain this tension. A sequel to 2014’s Godzilla, the film sees the desperate people of Earth calling upon the creature they’re most afraid of in order to fight an even greater peril. Early trailers presented the destruction wrought as a giddy extravaganza, with actors spitting out punchy one-liners while the world collapses around them. The classic Godzilla movies I grew up with embraced the same sort of approach, taking the giant lizard seriously, but not too seriously.

My first Saturday-morning encounter with the creature was a childhood awakening. Godzilla’s Revenge (1969)—originally titled All Monsters Attack—is a fantasia seen through the eyes of a boy named Ichiro living in an urban industrial complex. Factory stacks bellow plumes of smog when he walks to school. His favorite place to roam near the train yard where his father works is also where his bullies await. Ichiro daydreams of visiting Monster Island, where he meets Minya, Godzilla’s squat-nosed offspring that blows smoke rings instead of atomic breath and that is himself bullied by one of the island’s many creatures. Godzilla later teaches them both how to be brave, only minutes after annihilating a gargantuan praying mantis. As an anxious kid, I reveled in Ichiro’s (and Minya’s) transformation from tormented to fearless, guided by a friendly demigod. At the time, I didn’t know that Godzilla had his roots in something far graver than childhood bullying: the ruin of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by American atomic bombs.

Not long after airing Godzilla’s Revenge, the same TV station showed the U.S. version of 1954’s Gojira, which was co-directed by Honda and renamed in the United States as Godzilla, King of the Monsters! Here, the actor Raymond Burr is edited, somewhat awkwardly, into the Japanese original as an American reporter named Steve Martin informing the West of the destruction of Tokyo by the atomic-bomb-awakened creature. While King of the Monsters! all but stripped away Gojira’s references, metaphorical or literal, to the nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the American film is still presented as a true horror movie. At age 7, I could barely understand the plot and was mostly interested in the drama of a rampaging monster. And yet it is so tonally different from Godzilla’s Revenge that I found it difficult to see the movies as being about the same creature.

King of the Monsters! is a deeply melancholic experience that’s made even sadder by the character of the eyepatch-wearing scientist Daisuke Serizawa, who has the power to kill Godzilla with an oxygen-destroying device. Serizawa insists to the government that his weapon is an even greater threat to the world than the conquering beast, but he agrees to its use, knowing that he must sacrifice his own life in the process because it must be detonated by hand. Serizawa’s death, as Godzilla is suffocated and then reduced to a skeleton, is macabre and frightening. The movie ends without a hint of celebration; that Godzilla has been defeated and the terror is over is treated as confusing and bittersweet. In other words, King of the Monsters! was no child’s spectacle of monster battles. Even then I could sense the shadow of a nuclear holocaust in the images of Tokyo as an emptied-out core.

But like many viewers, I was able to look past the darkness of this origin story as I devoured the countless other Godzilla movies that were released during the ’60s and ’70s. The Japanese-made films of the 1970s had the creature fight an assortment of foes, including the kindly Mothra, the pteranodonlike Rodan, the giant spider Kumonga, the gargantuan lobster Ebirah, the robotic doppelgänger Mechagodzilla, and the living sludge of contamination and decay named Hedorah. The most fearsome—and by far the coolest—was King Ghidorah, the three-headed, electricity-spitting alien leviathan that will have a starring role in Godzilla: King of the Monsters when it opens Friday. Each new iteration of Godzilla became more charmingly ridiculous: In the 1973 Godzilla vs. Megalon, Godzilla rides along the ground on his tail, hitting his foe square in the chest with his feet.

The truth is, I’ve never quite been able to resolve these two versions of Godzilla: one a destroyer of worlds and a reminder of the horrible truth of nuclear war; the other a gentle, stern, and sometimes silly father figure. In almost all of the Godzilla movies after the 1954 original, the nuclear-war symbolism is barely an echo. The most recent work to tackle the issue head-on is the remarkable and deeply serious 2016 Toho Studios film Shin Godzilla, in which a devastated Japan must give the United States permission to drop an atomic bomb on Tokyo to destroy Godzilla. Shin Godzilla makes the bold assertion that maybe Gojira movies shouldn’t be fun at all.

Gareth Edwards’s 2014 Godzilla, the first film in the current American franchise, made an honest attempt to return Godzilla to his roots as a purely inscrutable, almost godlike entity. Like the original movie, Godzilla doesn’t have the titular monster make a full-bodied appearance until deep into the story. (As in the 1954 version, the creature is first spotted in the distance from the main character’s point of view.) It’s one of a half-dozen striking moments in an otherwise serviceable movie. The film occasionally references American nuclear testing, and the overarching plot involves radiation-eating monsters that Godzilla has to battle. But once Godzilla begins fighting, there’s little to separate this version from earlier iterations—except that the dinosaur is a beautiful CGI rendering and not a man in a lizard suit. What the film does do, however, is clarify how paradoxical the character of Godzilla is. The audience is meant to cheer him on, no matter how dangerous he might be.

The monster has evolved too far from his original metaphor to be obliged to return there. Godzilla endures as a pop-cultural force today in part because he has come to represent the idea that what can destroy humanity can, in turn, also liberate it. What made the early Godzilla films so strange was how this pure annihilating force could also express a temperament. Even in Gojira, in which Godzilla is a stand-in for human scientific hubris, there is still an odd anthropomorphic quality to him, which adds to the elegiac impression of his death. Godzilla projects the essential fear of not knowing whether humans will be the ultimate liberators or executioners of the planet. Like Godzilla, humanity is suspended in this dichotomy. So if audiences are going to cheer when they see King of the Monsters, let it be not for the thrill of the spectacle, but because, at the last minute, Godzilla teaches viewers, like Minya, how to be both fierce and benevolent, to do whatever is needed to save one another.



On Thursday morning, the report that had been compiled over the past 22 months by Special Counsel Robert Mueller was released, in a “lightly redacted” digital format, to the American public. By Thursday evening, cheeky reviews of the 448-page compendium (title: The Mueller Report; author: US GOVERNMENT) had popped up on Goodreads. One went like this: “The previous owner used a black highlighter on all the interesting bits and the main character has no redeeming qualities.” Another: “Slightly better than the SparkNotes edition released a few weeks ago.” Another: “The whole ‘we wouldn’t presume to say the president was guilty even if he was, but we will say that he’s definitely not not guilty’ thing is a bit of a cop-out. But it did have its moments.”

What did the president [redacted], and when did he [redacted]? The report, as those playfully disappointed assessments suggest, does not fully answer those questions. Instead—a situation that occasionally implies the work of Dons Quixote or DeLillo, rather than Robert Mueller—the report goes out of its way to acknowledge its own limitations. It does not contain the information that would have come from an interview with President Donald Trump, and interviewees lied to the Office of Special Counsel, the report notes, heaving a nearly audible sigh. These factors in combination helped to inform its conclusion: that “the evidence was not sufficient to support criminal charges” in the matter of the 2016 Trump campaign’s collusion with Russia. You could call that punting; you could call it restraint; or you could call it what Trump did on Thursday, as he publicly celebrated the report’s nonfindings: “It’s called no collusion, no obstruction.”



I spent much of Thursday watching cable news’s reaction to the report’s public release, which means mostly that, if I have somehow wronged you or your family in the past, you can now consider yourself thoroughly avenged. But it also means that I have passed several strange hours watching pundits engaged in that most modern of activities: grappling with revelations that manage to be at once outrageous and … thoroughly predictable. Shocked, but not surprised. It might be the defining emotion of the politics of 2019, and it lurks, among the shaded legalese, in the Mueller report. The person leading the American government lies, with regularity and impunity? It’s outrageous, but widely known. His agents do the same, on his behalf? Scandalous, and also a bit tedious. The White House, populated by several beneficiaries of nepotism and headed by someone whose mentor was a lawyer for the mob, has a dull tint of corruption? Shocking! But no longer surprising.



Trump is exceptionally skilled at separating people from their outrage, and one of his most common rhetorical tricks is his use of repetition as incantation. Whether it’s “U-S-A” or “Lock her up” or “No collusion, no obstruction,” his catchphrases have the effect not only of imposing his version of reality on audiences with blunt-force insistence, but also of lulling them into complacency. The refrains here function in the way refrains usually do: They become so familiar as to stop being questionable. And the Mueller report, so long in the making, has succumbed in its own way to that dynamic. A document making similar claims about a different president would be eye-popping; this particular report, however, about this particular president, simply confirmed that Donald Trump is the same person the American public—his supporters and his dissenters alike—has known him to be all along: venal, self-absorbed, unprepared. The report was metabolized accordingly. As MSNBC’s Chris Hayes summed it up on Thursday evening, it “isn’t a bombshell so much as a compendium and confirmation of who the man is and how he conducts himself.”



Because of that—and because the special counsel’s investigation into the workings of the Trump campaign had led to indictments and convictions that were revealed in real time, rather than in the report—Mueller’s findings were treated, on Thursday, not only as a work of legal inquiry but also as a work of cultural mythology. (Or, as CNN’s Jake Tapper put it, “This document now goes from being a legal document to a political document.”) Who would determine The Narrative™ that would shape the report’s afterlife as a work of living history?



Tucker Carlson, on his Thursday-evening show, engaged in his own attempt at mythmaking. The Fox News host took a gleefully desk-bound victory lap over the Mueller report, reveling in it not so much as a win for the president but as a defeat for other members of the media. “The Mueller report is probably the single most humiliating thing that has ever happened to the White House press corps in the history of this country,” Carlson said, with his signature blend of rage and ennui. The soliloquy that followed—which shifted from mockery of the “hysterical children” of the press to a lengthy suggestion that the Mueller report’s very existence has prevented the success of the Trump presidency—was illustrated with a series of caps-locked chyrons: LEFT STRUGGLES TO ACCEPT MUELLER REPORT FINDINGS; LEFT DEMANDS YOU STOP LISTENING TO AG BARR; OUR LEADERS WORSHIPPED MUELLER FOR YEARS. The longtime Fox anchor Brit Hume joined Carlson on the air: “Some of us, such as those of us here at Fox News, don’t have this collusion dog doo all over our shoes, and never did,” Hume said. “So we look at this and we think to ourselves, ‘Well, I guess we sort of sized that up properly.’”



Others were more succinct about it. Donald Trump Jr., one of the many White House surrogates who discussed the Mueller report on Thursday, put it like this via Twitter: “TOLD YA!!!” His father, for his part, posted a meme featuring an image of himself, his back turned to the viewer, his person shrouded by fog, the picture overlaid with words printed in Game of Thrones’ distinctive font. “Game Over,” it said, disregarding the fact that, on this particular show, what is dead may never die. “I’m having a good day,” the president said cheerfully, at a public appearance shortly after the report was released. And he was: The day began when Trump’s recently appointed attorney general, William Barr, convened a press conference at the Justice Department—one staged, absurdly, for reporters who had not yet read the report. Here was the attorney general, acting less as an objective arbiter of the law and more as a foot soldier in an army with a singular general. Barr painted a misleadingly rosy picture of the contents of the report itself, doing his own work to bend history to his, and his boss’s, will. The effort was so egregious that even Fox News took note of it: “The attorney general seemed almost to be acting the counsel for the defense,” the anchor Chris Wallace said.



But the president and his surrogates were not merely fighting for the narrative as a matter of history. They were also arguing for something in the present moment: the notion that the Mueller report and its conclusions are so insignificant—so thoroughly unsurprising—as to be laughable. Dog doo. TOLD YA!!! The Mueller report is commonly compared to the Starr Report, and to the report that was produced decades before by the Senate Watergate Committee. But the most apt analogue might be the Iran-Contra report, authored by the independent counsel Lawrence Walsh. That assessment, like its most recent successor, found that the personal conduct of the president (Ronald Reagan) in the Iran-Contra affair “fell well short of criminality which could be successfully prosecuted.” It also concluded, however, that the president had “created the conditions which made possible the crimes committed by others.” That document, too, navigated the tension between criminality in particular and wrongdoing in general; it, too, suggested both Americans’ great capacity for outrage and their equally great capacity for cynicism. (Some of the participants in the affair would receive presidential pardons; Reagan’s role in the scandal would be relegated, for the most part, to the haze of history.)



And on it goes. The shock mingling with the gah. Trump’s “on both sides” reaction to the horrors of Charlottesville. The arrest of Roger Stone. Jeff Sessions’s firing as attorney general. Last summer, The New York Times published the results of an extensive investigation into the accumulation of wealth that had helped Donald Trump first to become very rich, and then to star in a reality show whose theme song contains the lyrics “Money, money, money, money—MONEY,” and then to leverage the fame that resulted into a successful bid for the presidency of the United States. The Times’ report was a journalistic indictment of Watergate-level proportions. And yet it came and went over the course of little more than a day, barely putting a dent in the fickle American attention span. The problem, once again, wasn’t that the report wasn’t shocking—it was!—but rather that it wasn’t, in a deep sense, surprising. It confirmed a thing about Trump that was already part of the story about Trump. It revealed a particularly perverse kind of twist: The history of corruption convened a kind of impunity in the present. And the paradox was replicated, in its way, on Thursday, as Americans made sense of a report that contained so many shocks and so few true surprises. The matter wasn’t that the Mueller report was “fake news,” in that other Trumpian refrain. It was instead something both simpler and more menacing: It was old news.





“Now is the time, and this the country ... Let us then seize the present moment, and establish a national language, as well as a national government.”

That is what Noah Webster wrote in 1789 at the age of 31, long before he had compiled the nation’s first major dictionary. It is a clarion call for American linguistic unity and independence in his Dissertations on the English Language—a 409-page treatise remarkable for its boldness and length as much as for its sweeping, generalized history of the language. The book’s main argument goes something like this: There is to be no elite in America, no linguistic differentiation between classes and regions.

For Webster, new nationhood provided unique opportunities for language reform—opportunities that would fade quickly, he warns, if not grabbed before America’s language, like Britain’s, deteriorated owing to homegrown “corruptions” such as regional dialects, affectation, nostalgia for English manners and customs, class divisions, and innumerable other evils. At least America did not have to cope with the deleterious effects of “superfluous ornament” in prose like Edward Gibbon’s and Samuel Johnson’s, the language of nobility and the British Court, and “the influence of men, learned in Greek and Latin, but ignorant of their own tongue; who have laboured to reject much good English, because they have not understood the original construction of the language.”

The Dissertations illustrates, at a young age, Webster’s copious memory and tireless and detailed attention to what would become self-defining themes in his efforts to reform the profile of the English language in America: hundreds of sounds and numerous examples of classes of letters and words that complicate English pronunciation, orthography that confounds consistent pronunciation, irregularity of orthography that bedevils young people and adults alike, and etymology to which few people paid much attention but that would, if handled his way, clarify and help solve a good many problems in the way the language is learned and used. The sheer effort is impressive.

The most distinctive character of the Dissertations, however, relates to his assessment of flaws in American culture; his antipathy toward foreign influences; his strident plea for the banishment of local dialect and pronunciation; the establishment of a national “standard” of language; his assertions that all languages descend from “a common stock”; his elaborate scheme to reform spelling in America; and, especially, a distrust of a variety of so-called authorities in matters of language usage that, if unchecked, he is adamant would threaten national unity. These aspects of Webster’s philosophy can sometimes seem to conflict with one another; though his dedication praises Benjamin Franklin for never assuming “dictatorial authority,” it is less clear that Webster himself avoids it. Here are a few examples:

When a particular set of men, in exalted stations, undertake to say “we are the standards of propriety and elegance, and if all men do not conform to our practice, they shall be accounted vulgar and ignorant,” they take a very great liberty with the rules of the language and the rights of civility.

If language must vary, like fashions, at the caprice of a court, we must have our standard dictionaries republished, with the fashionable pronunciation, at least once in five years; otherwise a gentleman in the country will become intolerably vulgar.

Customs, habits, and language, as well as government should be national. America should have her own distinct from all the world.

In his Collection of Essays and Fugitiv Writings (he spells fugitive provokingly without the e), published the following year, Webster exhibits his proposals with an ardor that became the butt of jokes for years to come. He was mocked, for example, for parading his spelling reforms in his preface with a warning to his readers that amounts to a self-parody:

In the essays, ritten within the last year, a considerable change in spelling iz introduced by way of experiment. This liberty waz taken by the writers before the age of queen Elizabeth, and to this we are indeted for the preference of modern spelling over that of [John] Gower and [Geoffrey] Chaucer.

Getting into the swing of it and explaining why he concealed his name in many of his early essays, he continues:

I very erly discuvered, that altho the name of an old and respectable karacter givs credit and consequence to hiz ritings, yet the name of a yung man iz often prejudicial to hiz performances. By conceeling my name, the opinions of men hav been prezerved from an undu bias arizing from personal prejudices, the faults of the ritings hav been detected, and their merit in public estimation ascertained.

He lost a good $400 (about $10,000 today) on the Dissertations, which added to his money worries. More than anything else, he wanted to write, but he thought he might try the business world, perhaps as a book merchant in Boston: “To renounce all my literary pursuits, which are now very congenial with my habits, would not … make me unhappy,” he wrote in a letter. He decided instead to take up an offer to edit and write a new Federalist newspaper, the American Minerva, in New York, which would undergo several name and leadership changes before an exhausted Webster severed his ties. William Cobbett, the successful editor of Porcupine’s Gazette in Philadelphia, who had endured just about enough of what he regarded as Webster’s self-proclaimed and bombastic authority, called him “a most gross calumniator,” “a great fool,” and a “bare-faced liar.” Many others also taunted Webster in print.

Embittered and deeply in debt, Webster mourned that America had begun to “crumble”: “From the date of Adam, to this moment,” he ranted in the July 12, 1797, issue of his newspaper, the Minerva, “no country was ever so infested with corrupt and wicked men, as the United States … Bankrupt speculators, rich bankrupts, ‘patriotic’ Atheists … are spread over the United States … deceiving the people with lies … We see in our new Republic, the decrepitude of Vice; and a free government hastening to ruin, with a rapidity without example.”

Webster was certainly not alone with his Jeremiah-like lamentations. There was widespread dismay among Americans, including the Founders, that the social and intellectual foundations of the new nation had been corrupted by the lack of unifying authority in an undisciplined democracy, whether in politics, social customs and manners, religion, or language.

Webster blamed the British ruling classes for most of the problems he identified in early American childhood education and the American language. He regarded this as part of the malaise of a new nation that was failing to declare its cultural independence from Britain. In Webster’s mind, the heart and soul of this problem was linguistic subservience. It turned him into what some have called the nation’s first language strategist. Having read essays by German philosophers on how a national language could determine the moral behavior of a country’s populace, he became convinced that a national language could be an integral part of a comprehensive American cultural revolution. Such a revolution, he hoped, would ensure the preservation of a distinctly American republican culture with far-reaching effects on the country’s institutions, as well as on the morals and behavior of its citizens.

He spent the rest of his life on vigorous efforts toward creating a standard so vague that it never even came close to existing in American cultural life. By the time he died in 1843, Webster was disillusioned and angry. His vision of a nation somehow united by a distinctly American language had evaporated, and his dictionary was on its way to extinction—or so he thought.

This article has been excerpted from Peter Martin’s forthcoming book, THE DICTIONARY WARS: The American Fight over the English Language. Copyright © 2019 by the author and reprinted by permission from Princeton University Press. 



Editor's Note: This article is part of a series about the gay-rights movement and the 50th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising.

In her classic 1975 self-portrait, the lesbian photographer Joan E. Biren (or “JEB,” as she is more commonly known) tacitly shifts the meaning of a road sign. Smiling, with a glint in her eye, she leans comfortably against the post, her confident posture signaling a reconfiguration of the word emblazoned above her head: DYKE points not to the Virginia town the sign is announcing, but to the photographer herself. Self-Portrait, Dyke, VA (1975) is a reclamation of the slur and a confrontation with all but JEB’s most kindred viewers.

JEB’s cheeky photo is among several other works by the documentarian being shown as part of “Art After Stonewall, 1969–1989,” an exhibition currently on view at New York City’s Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian Art and Grey Art Gallery. In this context, the photo takes on deeper meaning amid the broader trajectory of queer struggle: The show, which joins several others around the country examining LGBTQ contributions to art in the years since the Stonewall uprising, is a non-exhaustive survey of works across medium, genre, and decades. Curated by Jonathan Weinberg, with Tyler Cann and Drew Sawyer, “Art After Stonewall” includes a range of 150 artistic productions: pins, installations, photos, paintings, and sculptures. Some gesture obliquely toward the violence that led to the riot for which the series is named; others look inward.

Among its most compelling works are portraits, such as those by JEB and the photographer Diana Davies, that constituted some of the earliest widely distributed images of 20th-century queer life. Often in black and white, these photos chronicle moments of everyday tenderness between LGBTQ people, especially lesbians, as well as historical landmarks (including, of course, the Stonewall Inn). In one particularly striking JEB photo, taken in 1980, the lesbian feminist poet and scholar Audre Lorde reads at a podium. Lorde is jubilant, the movement and power of her words captured with palpable reverence and affection in JEB’s print. (The photographer also documented Lorde’s friend and collaborator, the poet Pat Parker.)

JEB’s portraits, and much of the other work in “Art After Stonewall,” is both implicitly and explicitly political. The photographs range from images of lesbians kissing outdoors to a depiction of nude women gathered at the “Ovular,” a feminist photography workshop. In addition to JEB’s photographs, the show also includes copies of The Furies, the newspaper published by the lesbian separatist collective she and others formed in 1971. The documents, like the photographer’s self-portrait, are at once sly and provocative—they wink at knowing in-group members while shirking outside attention. The radical feminist periodical off our backs, for example, is invoked by the presence of On Our Backs, the first widely distributed lesbian erotica—a sexual milestone that also celebrates queer women’s bodies and the tensions they held. In reflecting an ongoing movement, these works also enabled its growth.

Indeed, the Washington, D.C.–area photographer has said she first identified as a propagandist, then as an artist. JEB conceived of her photographic mandate as inseparable from the project of historical record-keeping, of bringing queerness out of the shadows. “I wanted to be a photographer in large part because I needed to see images of lesbians, and it was a visceral thing. I wanted a reflection of my reality, and I think everybody wants that,” JEB told the historian Kelly Anderson in 2004 as part of Smith College’s Voices of Feminism Oral History Project. “My experience is that there’s an enormous hunger among people to be able to see themselves.”

She continued:

I really felt like my camera was a barometer of the climate of the times, because it got easier and easier and easier to, as people came out and the movement grew and people felt more comfortable. So that there was a synergy there between me putting out the images, people seeing that people weren’t immediately, hauled off to jail or whatever their fears were, that people didn’t lose their jobs, that I was careful and respectful. ... We were not a visible community. So I was making something visible and the more it became visible, the more it encouraged other people to be visible.

Though more than four decades have passed since JEB began her catalytic work, her initial mission remains relevant, if also complicated by the nonlinear progress of various queer movements. For LGBTQ people, the stakes of being seen have always been high—at times, a matter of life and death.

Transgender women of color, including activists such as Miss Major, who was present for the inciting actions at Stonewall, have long cautioned against starry-eyed characterizations of LGBTQ social advances in recent decades, artistic or otherwise. “If Stonewall would have made a difference, things would be better today,” she told HuffPost last year. Visibility, in art and beyond, has never guaranteed queer people their safety; often, particularly for transgender women of color, increased representation has portended high rates of violence.
Consequently, the challenge of evaluating the art associated with the movement that swelled after the Stonewall riots is the same conundrum that animates the work: What does it really mean to be seen, and by whom? “Art After Stonewall” doesn’t attempt to answer that question neatly, or conclusively. For some, such as JEB, art has been a vehicle through which to reflect—and affirm—communities rendered invisible in spaces of artistic and political power. For others, such as the members of the activist art collective Gran Fury, art can function to indict the people and systems whose (in)action contributed to the devastation of the AIDS crisis. Still others, such as the painter Glenn Ligon, whose No. 417 (Sweetheart) hangs in the Grey Art portion of the exhibit, offer achingly tender meditations on same-gender longing.
In the context of “Art After Stonewall,” JEB’s dual mandate, of capturing and encouraging love between women, is both admirable and almost crushingly optimistic. It’s impossible to consider the simple joy of a kiss between women, as in JEB’s Gloria and Charmaine (1979), without also acknowledging the fear of homophobic violence, especially from law enforcement (as in the JEB installation that wraps around the Leslie-Lohman’s outer facade). Still, the photographer and filmmaker’s first instincts remain resonant: “It was just about, we need this, it has to happen, nobody’s doing it, I’m going to do it. Because I need it personally.”



By Heart is a series in which authors share and discuss their all-time favorite passages in literature. See entries from Jonathan Franzen, Amy Tan, Khaled Hosseini, and more.

Jayson Greene, the author of Once More We Saw Stars, lost his 2-year-old daughter, Greta, on an ordinary day, while she sat on a city bench with her grandmother. It goes against every instinct that a brick, falling from the eighth story of a crumbling Manhattan building, could end the incandescent life of a child. But that’s the gutting fact of it. It happened, against all sense.

“I imagine it’s the same for all new parents: You slowly learn to believe in your child’s ongoing existence. Their future begins to take shape in your mind,” Greene writes. “[But] what happens to this sense when your child is swiftly killed by a runaway piece of your everyday environment, at the exact moment you had given up thinking that something could take all of this away at any moment? What lesson do your nerve endings learn?”

Greene’s memoir grapples with this lesson: the ruinous insight that the world can wound loved ones at random and for no reason. The book charts how, in the 15 months between Greta’s death and the birth of their second child, he and his wife survived overwhelming grief to find a path toward a new normal: a happiness brave enough to accept life’s constant dangers and complex enough to coexist with sorrow.

In a conversation for this series, Greene described how a passage from Dante’s Inferno inspired the book’s title, and how his work as a music critic helped him with the challenge of articulating unspeakable sadness and joy. A contributing writer and former senior editor at Pitchfork, Greene’s writing has appeared in The New York Times, GQ, and other publications. He spoke with me by phone.

Jayson Greene: I’d spent the year after Greta passed writing, and at that point I’d already published an op-ed called “Children Don’t Always Live” for The New York Times—the first time I’d written about Greta publicly. I was ready to put together a book proposal, and my agent had said, “You know, you really need to have a title of some kind.” That started the ball rolling in my head. For me, the process of trying to find a title was really a way of asking myself what the ultimate meaning of the story should be. It meant finding a way to distinguish between what the story meant to me, in my life, and what the story would mean to others as I told it.

I don’t mean to say it’s two different stories. They’re the same story. But when we tell stories, we step outside our lives in a way that’s not possible when we’re actually going through something. Part of storytelling means examining things as if it weren’t you at the center—and that distance, which you could basically call perspective, is part of the therapy. Coming up with the title was the moment where I had to make that shift. I had to ask myself, Why am I telling this story to other people?

At first, I kept thinking about the word between. That 15-month period of our lives, the time between Greta’s passing and Harrison’s birth, felt profoundly between two things, so I kept trying to make a title there. But nothing stuck, in part because I couldn’t think of anything that felt resonant or that I liked the sound of. On the one hand, I was thinking about this overwhelming, emotional topic, and on the other, I was like, “Oh, that would look terrible on a book jacket.” It was both processes happening at once.

One day my wife, Stacy, and I were talking about that period of our lives, and we agreed that it felt like a kind of purgatory. It was then that I thought about The Divine Comedy for the first time.

I hadn’t read The Divine Comedy since I was a freshman in college. And I hadn’t read Inferno since my first semester, when I was massively idiotic. I could not have been less prepared to soak up anything profound from the text, other than that there were monsters in it, and at the bottom there was a frozen lake, and that it was pretty gnarly that the dog ate the people’s heads. If you had offered me $500 to tell you the last lines of the Inferno, I would not have made $500.

I first thought the title might be some kind of play on “in a dark wood,” the setting where Dante famously finds himself in crisis as the book begins. But there was already a book called In a Dark, Dark Wood. So I picked up our copy of [Robert] Pinsky’s translation of Inferno, which we had in our home and never opened, while Stacy started looking for quotes on Goodreads. We both knew the answer was in there somewhere.

At one point, Stacy suggested that if the “dark wood” section was the very beginning of the Inferno, then maybe we should look at the very end. It goes like this:

To get back up to the shining world from there
My guide and I went into that hidden tunnel;

And following its path, we took no care
To rest, but climbed: he first, then I—so far,
Through a round aperture I saw appear

Some of the beautiful things that Heaven bears,
Where we came forth, and once more saw the stars.

At that point in the book, Virgil the poet has led Dante all the way down through every circle of hell to the very bottom, where Lucifer sits in a frozen lake. He has seen every manner of horror. But as they are crawling through the passageway on their way out, they finally see the literal light at the end of the tunnel—the “shining world” beyond hell, waiting for them at the end of the round aperture. When my wife read those last words, “we came forth, and once more saw the stars,” that was it. We’d found it. It was like a telegram had been sent to us.

In the last moment of the Inferno, Dante and Virgil haven’t actually escaped the underworld yet. They are only being afforded a glimpse of what ultimate beauty might feel and look like. That image somehow exactly captures where our lives were, and where, in some ways, our lives still are and may always remain. Maybe people are only ever afforded keyhole glimpses into the “beautiful things that Heaven bears”—and never all of them, but merely “some” of them. Whatever the word heaven might mean to you, that longing is part of the universal condition; Stacy and I are just experiencing it acutely through the loss of a child.

I loved that I’d lifted this little pebble out of Dante’s Inferno, which became like this little talisman that I carried around. But, more significant, I felt the word we had to be in the title. When my daughter died, I could not have felt more alone in the universe. I felt like I was the only person who really saw the Earth for what it was—this barren landscape. But I was not alone. One thing I learned about grief is that it can either blast you apart or pull you together. In our case, it pulled us so tightly together, just as a survival mechanism. That became the overwhelming theme that carried me through. This story involves my mother-in-law and her trauma, and Stacy’s family trauma, and my parents, and everyone around us, and Greta, and our son Harrison, too. The only way to write the book was to tell the story of how all of us pulled together to get through it.

It’s hard for me to say if my work as a music critic helped prepare me for the challenge of writing this book. It’s true that the critics I most admire are people who can accurately describe the sensations that works of art stir in you, which are by nature ineffable. When you write about art, you’re writing about something that has moved you, and you’re left struggling to describe it. That is in some ways the basic act of criticism—applying the analytical mind to the wordless realm of emotion.

With visual art, at least you can use words that describe physical things. You can describe the color of the paint, or the texture. There’s a concrete language that everyone more or less agrees on. The same with film: It’s happening in a big room, and you can see it up there on the screen. But music is so much harder to describe, in part because it unfolds in the head. You find yourself flailing in a directionless space, with no clear idea what to refer to. Music writing is lamentably easy to make fun of, and it’s hell to edit, for that reason. But do it for long enough, and you start to find your coordinates. In all those years of writing music criticism, I probably did absorb some larger lesson that I wasn’t paying attention to. Maybe that lesson had to do with how to describe something that is only happening inside of you, something that feels like you could never convey it to anyone.

At the same time, it’s very hard to say exactly what skills I used to write this book. After Greta died, I threw everything I had at the task of surviving. Getting through that period was like putting water on a burning building. When I look back at the writing, I ask myself—What did I do? What tools did I use? But the answer is that I was just trying to survive. I used whatever I had. That includes every resource I’ve ever brought to bear.

I don’t want to make it sound as if I was having an ecstatic vision, like some sort of 12th-century mystic, but the book does feel like an artifact to me—something external to me that was created during a period of unbearable grief and pain. I had a story to excavate out of myself, something that I had to tell to live. It was like performing a sort of surgery. It was so tied up in the instinctive process of grieving that sometimes it’s hard for me to see it clearly now.

I don’t want to create from that kind of grief ever again. There was this unbearable clarity to so much of what we experienced, the kind that comes when your body is fighting off some kind of terrible illness. You’re never more engaged with the act of living than when you’re trying not to die. So I’m relieved to find that after the fight, your body can go back to a state of lesser attention—of not trying to utilize every resource you have, just to exist.

That return to mundanity is joyful. That’s the reason I write about those moments with Greta when she would wake up at 4:30 in the morning, and I’d sneak her out of the apartment because everyone was sleeping, and nothing would be open. Those moments became holy after she left, small as they were, because they were the moments that contained the ultimate.



Since it debuted Friday, Taylor Swift’s “You Need to Calm Down” has bounced around in my head for exactly the reason a pop song should: the way it sounds. I like that the beat’s something a great beast might march to, slowly from one side to another, rumbling with each footfall. I like that the “oh-oh” swell of the chorus takes yummy harmonies, typically the key side dish in pop, and makes them the main course. I like the dry, silly way Swift drawls the strongest punch line of the track: “Like, damn … it’s 7 a.m.”

But I’ve also been fixated on—uncalmed by, and maybe even losing sleep over!—what the lyrics say. Shout along with this brain bender: “Shade never made anybody less gay!”

“You Need to Calm Down” is Swift’s grand LGBTQ-rights statement, released in the middle of Pride Month with all the precision of a bank’s new credit-card rollout. The song’s second verse takes on homophobic demonstrators: “Sunshine on the street at the parade / But you would rather be in the dark ages.” The video, released today, has a legion of queer celebs doing famously queer things such as sipping tea, performing in drag, and getting married in matching baby-blue tuxes. It closes with a plug to sign a petition for the passage of the Equality Act, which would ban discrimination based on sexual orientation and identity.

For a star whose greatest political controversy used to be that she had no politics, a single that name-checks GLAAD is a real evolution, and it’s already reportedly having the concrete effect of boosting donations for gay rights. Yet fans seem equally fixated on the personal implications. Swift is the great champion of 2010s-era heterosexual romance: Football players and cheerleaders, princes and princesses, and James Deans and good girls have all paired up in her hits. But recent years have given rise to online speculation that she’s secretly canoodling with the model Karlie Kloss, leading to buzz that Swift might “come out” on her forthcoming album, Lover. Thus far, though, her only coming-out has been as an ally: a straight person who marches for her queer friends.

Fifty years since the Stonewall uprising, allyship has become a tricky subject. LGBTQ folks desiring legal protections, cultural inclusion, social services, and all the other items on the gay agenda rightly welcome the help of straight people. Queer people used to mostly stand alone in advocating for those things, and it wasn’t long ago that a video like the one for “You Need to Calm Down” would have been assumed to be a career-ender for a performer banking on wide popularity. But public sentiment, the marketplace, and the dynamics of online communication have given queerness a trendy mainstream component. Big corporations such as Target and Bank of America see an upside in advertising that involves rainbows and same-sex kisses. Big pop stars do, too.

The fear for many queer people is less that allies might profit off them than that allies might change and defang what queerness means. The A in terms such as LGBTQIA+ typically stands for “asexual/aromantic,” but it’s often mistaken for “ally,” which is a sign of the danger here: People with no personal stake, facing no germane struggle of their own, not only join the club but also begin to define it. If heterosexuals become overly important in the gay movement, then it becomes harder to talk, with precision, about what the movement is actually for. The cause becomes more vulnerable to criticisms of faddishness, or of style above substance—of ROYGBIV and sequins as empty aesthetics. Its colors, in a way, grow duller.

Swift has shown some awareness of the risk of over-centering herself. She’s consistently linked her recent Pride-themed performances—including at the Stonewall Inn—with real activist efforts: writing her senator, directing people to a petition, driving donations. After the “Calm Down” video premiered, she tweeted out that fans should support the video’s co-stars, many of whom are queer, including Ellen DeGeneres, the actor Laverne Cox, the YouTuber Hannah Hart, RuPaul, and a group of RuPaul’s drag disciples. When rumors emerged that Swift and Katy Perry would kiss in the video, Swift shut them down, writing on Tumblr that “to be an ally is to understand the difference between advocating and baiting.”

But the Perry flap hints at why queer folks have a right to feel queasy from the song. Just check out the discourse about the video on Twitter. It’s packed with people marveling, maybe more than anything else, at the climax: Swift and Perry, dressed, respectively, as french fries and a hamburger, hugging. The two onetime rivals didn’t do the classic stunt lesbian kiss, but they did splashily end one of the most epic celebrity feuds in recent memory. Thought this video was about gay rights? Nope, it’s primarily narrative management for superstars.

The entire song, indeed, subsumes queerness into Swift’s narratives. Its breathtaking argument: that famous people are persecuted in a way meaningfully comparable to queer people. The first verse aims at anonymous tweeters sending Swift rude notes, making for yet another catchy gripe about “haters” in the lineage of 2010’s “Mean,” 2014’s “Shake It Off,” and much of 2017’s Reputation. The second verse is the one about homophobic protesters. The bridge addresses sexist pop fans and critics who pit famous women against one another: “We figured you out / We all know now we all got crowns.” (In the video, that portion is accompanied by drag queens playing divas such as Swift, Perry, Cardi B, and Lady Gaga, and they look great.)

Online snarkers against superstars and in-person shouters at gay people—why are these two classes of people sharing a song? In Swift’s telling, they’re both, fundamentally, nasty. “I’ve observed a lot of different people in our society who just put so much energy and effort into negativity,” she said in an Apple Music video explaining the song. “This seems like it’s more about you than what you’re going off about. Like, just calm down.” This explains the headline-quotable line that “shade never made anybody less gay.”

In the video, an unwashed-looking mob holds signs saying “Adam + Eve, not Adam + Steve.” In real life, Pride counterprotests feature yet-uglier slogans, such as “God hates fags.” In either case, referring to such speech as “shade” is wild. The modern usage of throwing shade originated with queer folks of color in underground vogueing scenes, went popular through RuPaul’s Drag Race, and is now a ubiquitous term for petty insults. Throwing shade is a social act, a performance, and it can be done out of genuine spite or—as when on Drag Race it’s a reality-show challenge—in good fun. There are many ways to describe a parent who disowns a trans kid, or a lawmaker who tries to nullify same-sex marriages, or a church member who crashes a gay soldier’s funeral. Shady isn’t one.

Writing off bigotry as negativity—the word Swift used to describe what her song is attacking—probably isn’t helpful either. Homophobia is a real ideology with a real history. Telling homophobes they’re boring downers probably won’t sway them, and it’s hard to imagine that such a message will comfort many of the people they target. Right here is the aforementioned meaning-drift, the dilution. “You Need to Calm Down” has, between its muddled metaphors, only one clear through line: Swift’s struggles with criticism in the public eye are like those of gay people facing actual hate for being who they are. Huge social conflicts are boiled into a bland, unworkable battle between smiley rainbow people and “haters.” And if you’re annoyed at that, you’ll be told you need to calm down.



Now in its 40th season, the PBS home-improvement show This Old House feels like the TV equivalent of New England clam chowder: hearty, wholesome, and old-school. The cast—headed up by the master carpenter Norm Abram and rounded out by the contractor Tom Silva, gardener Roger Cook, plumber Richard Trethewey, and host Kevin O’Connor—returns autumn after autumn, as consistently as uncles you might see every year at Thanksgiving dinner. The look and feel of the series hasn’t changed much since its debut in February 1979. Each episode still zeroes in on a few elements of home construction, such as installing a skylight or shoring up a foundation. In one of the rare, subtle signs that four decades have passed, Silva appears to be wearing an Apple Watch in a recent episode.

Every program on HGTV arguably owes its existence to This Old House, which first turned home renovation and real estate into television. Without it, viewers might never have gotten Property Brothers, or Fixer Upper, or probably even House Hunters International. All the same, it can be difficult to locate the similarities between This Old House and its descendants. These newer programs often unfold like reality TV–esque hero’s journeys, with the hosts figuring as creative geniuses who marshal old or otherwise sad houses through a rapid-fire rehabilitation and beautification process. This Old House, meanwhile, has no single star and little concern for dramatic narrative arcs. Its chief goal is, as it always has been, to put skilled tradespeople and the work they do in front of the camera.  

On This Old House, workers solve technical problems that seldom merit a mention on programs of the HGTV variety. In a recent episode, the crew is briefly flummoxed over where to install electrical outlets in a modern, minimalist kitchen that has prioritized windows over usable wall space. The building code mandates that outlets should be placed every few feet, but O’Connor clarifies the problem for the audience, asking, “Where do you put an outlet when there’s no wall?” The supervising electrician, Heath Eastman, devises an ingenious solution: He conceals the outlets in receptacles that can be pressed down into the countertop. The homeowner, Sunil, isn’t enthused about the prospect of disrupting the clean lines of the counter with pop-ups, but he takes a sensible view of the matter. “I personally wouldn’t want anything on the surface, but code is code and we have to have it,” he says.

The scene is quintessential This Old House. What could’ve been framed as a melodramatic battle of the wills is instead presented as a teachable moment between the tradesman and the homeowner. The show is fairly unusual among home-renovation programs in allowing workers like Eastman to speak at length and explain their craft to a national audience. This Old House keeps them at the forefront of the action, perhaps realizing that, without them, there’d be no action at all.

When This Old House launched, it didn’t look like the progenitor of a new genre of TV. That first, 13-episode season from 1979 initially seemed to be a Boston-area curiosity, accessible only to local residents via WGBH. But it struck a chord with viewers, almost 250,000 of whom tuned in every week to watch the titular house—a Victorian in Boston’s Dorchester neighborhood—undergo its gradual metamorphosis. The surge of interest allowed This Old House to vault into the primary PBS lineup a year later, where it has remained ever since.

Since the 1980s, the show has developed into a multiplatform media powerhouse. In addition to the flagship program, viewers can tune in to the spin-off TV show Ask This Old House, in which the cast helps homeowners with smaller-scale repairs and upgrades. Fans can also read This Old House magazine or follow the brand on Twitter, where the account cheerfully dispenses home-maintenance advice to 198,000 followers.

This Old House, of course, competes for eyeballs with a slate of newer shows hosted by highly telegenic and charismatic individuals. Audiences marvel at the gracious collectedness of Fixer Upper’s Joanna Gaines (who alone has 1.4 million Twitter followers), and wonder how she puts up with her goofy husband, Chip, as she floats around imposing a neutral-hued elegance on recalcitrant domestic interiors. Drew and Jonathan Scott hold together each episode of their various Property Brothers shows with their banter, fraternal competition, and identical good looks. It’s not for nothing that the Gaineses and the Scotts regularly feature on the covers of tabloids. These stars are their shows, because they seemingly carry the entire weight of the production on their shoulders.  

All the celebrity attached to home-improvement show hosts means that little attention is paid to the skilled tradespeople who improve the homes in question. When these workers do appear on camera, it’s usually in montages. Their movements are often sped up for the sake of time, so they scuttle around like chipmunks, hammering, carrying, plastering, painting. Their work, whether intentionally or not, is positioned as secondary to the dynamism of the main stars.

We see this clearly on HGTV’s new show Windy City Rehab, which recently ended its first season. The title suggests that the show is about renovating homes in Chicago, but it’s really about Alison Victoria, the star, who poses with a sledgehammer in promotional shots. Victoria is a professional home flipper, and it’s hard not to admire her style. She evaluates properties with a caustic realism that brings to mind Simon Cowell: “The windows are a mess, the awning is awful, the glass block is disgusting.” As a home flipper, Victoria chiefly aims to turn the largest profit possible from selling her creations, and we watch her battle against time, weather, and occasional bureaucratic red tape to accomplish it.

Victoria has an edge to her, which is likely a requirement for a woman trying to succeed in a field that is still dominated by men. “It’s not for the weak,” she says of her chosen profession in a March episode. Understandably, she strives to control as many aspects of the project as possible. “If you want something done right, you do it yourself,” she remarks, after a set of kitchen cabinets turns out too short due to a measuring error on the part of a contractor. When she sources vintage pieces at a furniture restorer’s workshop, the exchange largely consists of her telling the craftsman what she wants. Workers only fleetingly appear in the usual construction montages. This overlooking of tradespeople is certainly not unique to Victoria’s show—it’s only the latest manifestation of a pattern that has come to define home-renovation TV as a whole.

If skilled workers are largely written out of television shows that rely on their expertise to function, it’s not surprising that fewer young people than ever are pursuing careers in trade. There is a genuine shortage of skilled labor in the United States, caused by, according to The Washington Post, lingering effects of the Great Recession, the retirement of veteran laborers, and “the fact that many high-school graduates are not interested in blue-collar jobs.” This issue is undoubtedly a complex one, but media representations of trade might bear at least some scrutiny. Who wants to be reduced to the backdrop while the true drama takes place in the foreground?

This Old House stands apart from its competition by keeping its workers in the spotlight—young apprentices included. The 16th episode of Season 40, titled “Apprentice Sill School,” features the great Norm Abram instructing two apprentices, Carly and Erick, in how to install a “sill,” or layer of wood, on the foundation of a home. This hidden piece keeps our walls from falling in on us—it supports a building’s frame and floor joists. As viewers watch, they see Carly and Erick learning exactly how a house comes together. Their movements are a little awkward as they use hammers to smooth the edges of the foundation before the sills can be installed. Their work is slow and hesitant. The only noticeable sounds in these scenes are Abram’s voice and the clink of metal on concrete.

It’s no accident that This Old House devotes so much time to apprentices like Carly and Erick. They’re on-screen as part of the show’s “Generation Next” initiative—a broad program aimed at recruiting more people to the trades. In launching this initiative, the show is attempting to counter the U.S. labor shortage by making carpentry and other hands-on professions seem more accessible to young men and women alike. Generation Next has been putting apprentices on the show since 2017, providing them with training and national-television exposure. “There’s every reason to go into the building trades today,” Tom Silva has said. “If you are good, you will absolutely have work.” He’s not exaggerating: The Bureau of Labor Statistics forecasts enticing job prospects for workers in a variety of fields, including plumbers, glaziers, and masons.  

Generation Next is a natural offshoot of what was already present in the structure and priorities of This Old House from the beginning, especially in the way that it provides a voice and visibility to skilled tradesmen and women. As the series moves into its fifth decade, its investment in younger workers signifies a promising new direction: a way for this admittedly old show to reach the audience that most needs to absorb its message.  



On Tuca & Bertie, the new Netflix series from the BoJack Horseman animator and production designer Lisa Hanawalt, the birds don’t need bees. The show follows its titular friends—cartoon bird-women voiced by Tiffany Haddish and Ali Wong, respectively—as the two navigate the familiar pitfalls of young adulthood: job troubles, assorted existential crises, and escalating libidos.

The series, which is streaming now, is perhaps the most surreal addition to a slowly expanding range of television shows that explore female desire with a mix of humor, vulgarity, filth, and thoughtfulness. The series has earned natural comparisons to the Ilana Glazer– and Abbi Jacobson–led sitcom Broad City, but part of Tuca & Bertie’s charm is how the brightness of Hanawalt’s animated world balances the mystifying and mundane circumstances her characters encounter.

When Tuca and Bertie wrestle with their explorations of sexuality, they do so against an eccentric background. The two are, after all, avian creatures. And the irreverent show takes a playful approach to anatomy more broadly: There are bouncing breasts attached to buildings, “boob cannolis” behind pastry-shop glass displays, and braless plant-humans. Tuca & Bertie is as whimsical as it is amorous, a welcome reprieve from the many shows that either cast women purely as sex objects or relegate their relationships to melodrama.

Though Tuca and Bertie’s world is plenty outrageous, the series is grounded by its compassion for the women as a duo and as individuals. The protagonists are a touch co-dependent, and their concerns often overlap, but their characters are distinct. (Even the show’s official Twitter account features missives in their separate voices.) Wong’s Bertie is more obviously anxious, about sex and everything else, but she’s also loyal, kind, and deeply intelligent. Haddish’s Tuca is brash and needy, but she’s also resourceful and bighearted.

Notably, the series doesn’t treat its characters’ sexuality as a joke. Bertie, for instance, is in a long-term relationship with a perfectly lovely fellow—a robin named Speckle (Steven Yeun), who moves in with her at the outset of the season. As their relationship deepens, Bertie, an amateur culinarian, finds herself drawn to a powerful pastry chef. In one memorable sequence at the end of Episode 5, “Plumage,” she gets so flustered by an interaction with the hot baking teacher that she runs into the patisserie bathroom to masturbate. It’s one of several such scenes on the show that telegraph women’s lust with both humor and gravity. In another scene, early in the next episode, Bertie is so overcome by her attraction that, while preparing croissants, she vividly imagines herself having sex with her baking instructor. “Bad brain, bad brain, bad brain! Why do I always do this!” one part of her brain yells, to which another responds, “Because you’re horny!”
The relationship between Bertie and the baker takes a heavy turn later in the season. But even at this earlier point, Tuca & Bertie communicates the extent to which Bertie’s interest in the baker is at least partly driven by her anxieties about committing to Speckle. Still, she does make genuine efforts to be a good partner: It’s amusing to see Bertie and Speckle earnestly attempt to jazz up their sex life in one episode by showing one another pornography and, in Bertie’s case, checking out guides such as Hot Sex for Agreeable People and Oral History of Oral Orioles and Areolas.
Tuca, the more free-spirited of the two, seems comfortable with overt sexuality at first blush, but the show gradually complicates her temperament. When Bertie expresses her frustrations and guilt about the illicit fantasies she’s having, it’s Tuca who reminds her that idle daydreams don’t change Bertie’s love for Speckle. “As long as you don’t act on them, weird crushes are cool. Your brain is a free zone,” Tuca tells Bertie, adding, “I got, like, a billion weird crushes going on at a time. In my head, I’m married to three random strangers, I’m having an affair with six others, and I’m terrified that the whole thing is gonna come crashing down on me.”

The absurdity of Tuca’s fantasy, and the fact that she tells Bertie about it while the two are literally hiding from a jaguar that Tuca attempted to domesticate, validates Bertie’s uneasiness about her attraction to her instructor and helps assuage her guilt. Tuca & Bertie weaves enough levity into depictions of its characters’ fears and shortcomings, sexual and otherwise, to offset how daunting just about everything in adult life can feel.

By taking this balanced tonal approach to their interior struggles, the show also mirrors the way Tuca and Bertie themselves support each other through difficult moments: with earnest affirmations and snark alike. Thankfully, the series doesn’t trot out female characters with simple, #empowered relationships to their bodies or to love. Tuca and Bertie fumble through sex and relationships within the context of a world—even an animated one—where women often face unwelcome attention from men in the workplace and beyond. That the series addresses these concerns without losing its fizzy energy saves it from ever feeling too preachy.

Tuca & Bertie delights for a host of other reasons too. Fans of BoJack Horseman will be thrilled to discover that Hanawalt carries her well-documented enthusiasm for clever sight gags and cheeky wordplay into the Tuca & Bertie universe (and the BoJack creator Raphael Bob-Waksberg serves as executive producer on the new show). Among Tuca’s many side hustles, for example, is the work she does as a “ChoreGoose”; on a quick walk upstairs to visit Bertie, she listens to a podcast and hears an ad for a website-design service called “OvalSpace.” Her neighbor, Dapper Dog, has black, white, and yellow theater programs on his wall, each of them reading DUCKBILL. Hanawalt’s world is as wacky and effervescent as her leads.
It’s a consistent joy to watch the series bring that same richness to its characters’ internal realities. Tuca and Bertie are still trying to figure things out, but the series handles their growing pains—around sex and other issues—with tenderness and understanding. For shows featuring young women, that remains an all-too-rare consideration. Tuca & Bertie is a short watch, just 10 25-minute episodes, but its warmth lingers long after the pair fly off-screen.



James Fallows was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences today, honoring nearly 50 years of work in the media. Since being commissioned to write a profile of the senator from Texas, presidential hopeful, and “cool cat” Lloyd Bentsen in 1974, he has done most of that work as a writer, editor, blogger, and sometime talking head at The Atlantic over the course of a 40-plus-year tenure interrupted just twice by stints as a speechwriter in Jimmy Carter’s administration and the editor of U.S. News & World Report. Fallows has held multiple roles in his time at the magazine; he's now an Atlantic staff writer.

Over the past half century, Fallows has published millions of words in the magazine and on the website, composing thousands of articles and dozens of cover stories about politics and global affairs. Beyond his prolific production of long-form stories, Fallows has in more recent years become a beloved blogger, connecting with readers through shorter and more frequent online posts. During the 2016 presidential campaign, Fallows began compiling entries for the “Trump Time Capsule” to “catalogue some of the things Donald Trump says and does that no real president would do” —and went on adding to it even after Trump became president and continued doing those things.

His writing comprises its own kind of time capsule: a contemporaneous history of the events and developments of the late 20th and early 21st centuries. He described the experience of owning a personal computer when most people still didn’t, covered the Vietnam War origins of the guns now at the center of domestic gun-control debates, and questioned the merits of Reagan-era military spending as the Cold War drew to an end.  His insight, extensive reporting, and engaging writing have made his articles essential reading in their moments of publication and have lent them a timeless relevance, and resonance.

These eight pieces, written over the course of Fallows’s Atlantic career, offer a glimpse of what the American Academy of Arts and Sciences honored today.

“The Passionless Presidency”May 1979

In the last year of Carter’s administration, Fallows assessed where the president had gone wrong. “After two and a half years in Carter’s service,” he wrote. “I fully believe him to be a good man.” But he observed that Carter lacked “the passion to convert himself from a good man into an effective one, to learn how to do the job.” As a result, he wrote, Carter’s achievements failed to live up to his intentions.

“Living With a Computer”July 1982

The first successful personal-computer models were released to consumers in the mid-1970s; Fallows got his at the end of that decade, and wrote about it for The Atlantic three years later. He described both how the machine had improved his writing and editing process and the new distractions and dangers it posed before making specific recommendations to readers. “I’d sell my computer before I’d sell my children,” he wrote. “But the kids better watch their step.”

“Immigration: How It’s Affecting Us”November 1983

Following the passage of the 1965 Immigration Act amendments, which lifted quotas governing immigrant nationalities, the flow of immigrants into the United States from the developing world increased significantly. With the rise in newcomers came a rise in anti-immigrant sentiments—sentiments that Fallows challenged in this 1983 article. “In countless ... places … the words heard in the air, the clothes and faces seen on the street, the courses taught in the schools, have all changed because of immigration,” he wrote. “But it is far from clear to me that the changes under way are ominous or bad.”

“How the World Works”December 1993

The end of the Cold War in the early 1990s was celebrated as a victory for the laissez-faire capitalism championed by Americans. But in 1993, Fallows explored alternate approaches driving growth in economies around the world—and the ways they echoed moments from the history of the United States. “Every country that has caught up with others has had to do so by rigging its rules: extracting extra money from its people and steering the money into industrialists’ hands,” he asserted.

“Why Americans Hate the Media”February 1996

Fallows tackled this enduring question at a time when Fox News and the internet were still in their infancy and most Americans got their news from television and newspapers. His conclusion: There was a gulf between how the public and the media saw the world. Viewers wanted substance, and the media was covering the game instead. “The most depressing aspect of the new talking-pundit industry,” Fallows wrote, “may be the argument made by many practitioners: the whole thing is just a game, which no one should take too seriously.”

“The Fifty-First State?”November 2002

Four months before American troops invaded Iraq, Fallows laid out why they shouldn’t. By entering the war, he argued, the United States would end up mired in a potentially decades-long period of occupation during which it would have to take responsibility for running and protecting Iraq. “The day after a war ended,” he cautioned, “Iraq would become America’s problem.”

“China Makes, the World Takes”July/August 2007

By 2007, China had become the manufacturing center of the world—the subject of much hand-wringing over the years from people who feel the associated jobs should return to American workers. But Fallows argued that Americans shouldn’t be so resistant to China’s new economic role. “Are we uncomfortable with the America that is being shaped by global economic forces?” he asked. “If so, those trends themselves, and the American choices behind them, are what Americans can address. They’re not China’s problem.”

“The Tragedy of the American Military”January/February 2015

Beneath frequent displays of support for the troops, Fallows assessed in 2015, America was “a country willing to do anything for its military except take it seriously.” And that relationship was good for neither the country nor the military. He described the dangers posed by the public’s “reverent but disengaged attitude,” and the more serious engagement that should take its place.



Sometimes bad television happens to good actors. There’s no other way to rationalize what’s happening in What/If, a show in which Renée Zellweger is biting off chunks of scenery, shredding them with her dainty white teeth, and digesting them on camera while everyone else sits limply in her shadow. It’s not fair, really. There’s Zellweger—one Oscar, three Golden Globes, and three SAG Awards to her name—reaching the highest echelons of glorious diva-dom in her portrayal of Anne Montgomery, a superstar venture capitalist/amateur archer/revenge-plot architect. Then there’s the rest of the cast, drably saying their lines out loud with all the effervescence of powdered whey.

What/If, whose 10 episodes arrive on Netflix Friday, is a perplexing thing to think about, or to try to synopsize. In its heart it’s an ABC drama from a decade ago, splashy and soapy and steeped in pathetic fallacy. (Mike Kelley, who created What/If, was last seen on TV spearheading the 2011 ABC show Revenge, a loose, Hamptons-set update of The Count of Monte Cristo.) Jane Levy plays Lisa, the head of a struggling start-up that wants to revolutionize “molecular sequencing” in drug protocols for cancer patients. Blake Jenner is Sean, Lisa’s inanimate lunk of a husband, a former baseball player with secrets. Sean is tending bar one rainy evening when Anne Montgomery makes him an offer he can’t refuse: If he spends the night with her, she’ll fully fund Lisa’s company.

Here is where What/If really gets hoisted by its own petard. When you’ve had the opportunity to see Zellweger in full sexy speculator mode, speaking entirely in aphorisms, undulating across the room with all the hip-sway of Jessica Rabbit, and shooting literal arrows at her antagonists, everything else seems awfully dull. (“Left of center,” Anne’s stoic butler/bodyguard/archery instructor tells her. “Those are three words no one’s ever used to describe me,” Anne purrs in response.) Besides the ongoing saga of Lisa and Sean, there’s a watered-down Grey’s Anatomy imitation featuring a married doctor (played by Samantha Marie Ware) sleeping with her chief of surgery (Dave Annable), and holding hearts—literal and metaphorical—in her hands. Even the sexier story lines, liberated by Netflix’s lack of advertisers and scored to a corny Red Shoe Diaries soundtrack of yesteryear, radiate redundancy. This is Anne Montgomery’s show. Why bother pretending anything else can compete?

But there’s also the question of whether What/If is supposed to be this bad—whether it could actually be a striking work of postmodernism that deconstructs the network-TV drama into its component elements and then rebuilds it as a simulacrum whose easy artificiality both entrances and appalls. (It’s possible I’m giving Kelley too much credit.) The show has been pitched as a modern morality play, an anthology series in which every season considers a different hypothetical question. In an interview with Forbes, Kelley explained that he wanted to consider the murky morality of modern American life, and the ways in which people justify gratifying their desires. In the opening scene of What/If, Montgomery espouses her rules for success in business via a best-selling self-help book she’s dictating into an audio recorder, sniffing at “the uninvited position of lesser people’s moral agendas,” and affirming that “true greatness only comes to those willing to pursue it at any cost.”

Which is … a fascinating premise for a limited series to explore! But it’s also not at all, at least from the first five episodes made available for review, something What/If concerns itself with. Rather, the show is a Silicon Valley soap opera in which the characters have buried secrets emerging to bite them on their perfectly sculpted behinds. Moral dilemmas abound, both in plotlines and as features of a drinking game devised by a realtor named Lionel (John Clarence Stewart). Can it ever be acceptable to cheat? Sacrifice friends for success? Take money from bad people to do good things? What/If bats these ideas around like Ping-Pong balls to justify its premise, but it yawns at rather than considers them.

Moreover, Zellweger’s Anne is the only person who’s having any fun, which rather undermines the idea that morality is more than a mug’s game. When she’s not losing fencing bouts on purpose or snipping branches off bonsai trees for dramatic effect (or, in one scene, screaming into a stuffed tiger), she’s tossing her head into the distance and narrowing her eyes at anyone unwise enough to enter her light. It’s hard to imagine another actor carrying off Anne’s most theatrical outbursts (“Restraint is a virtue I no longer wish to embrace”) without crossing over into pantomime-dame territory, but Zellweger has an enduring girlishness that softens Anne’s absurd edges. On-screen, she’s as magnetic to watch as she ever was, and so good at selling such awful lines that it makes everyone else’s deficiencies more obvious. (If you’re skeptical about how bad the writing might actually be, please note that this is a show in which one character takes another out for dim sum and then says, “Dim sum serious thoughts going on behind those pretty eyes.”)
Whatever reasons Zellweger had for wanting to take this role (and you can only hope there were several hundreds of thousands of them), she transforms What/If single-handedly. Without her, it might have been a mere aberration—anachronistic, clunky, and immediately forgotten. With her, it’s a much more interesting beast, a show that allows an Oscar-winning actor to expose the story’s flaws and elevate it as a curiosity all at the same time. What/If also points to a certain cynicism on the part of Netflix, which disrupted the network-TV model only to stoke nostalgia for it a few years later. Perhaps that’s an ethical knot Season 2 can try to unravel.



Late last month—shortly after the special counsel’s office delivered the results of Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian collusion in the 2016 election to the Justice Department (and shortly after Attorney General William Barr sent his four-page summary of the years-in-the-making report to Congress, and shortly after President Donald Trump summed up the summary by declaring that report amounted to a “Total EXONERATION”)—the University of Southern California law professor Orin Kerr posted a tweet. “Imagine if,” Kerr wrote, “the Starr Report had been provided only to President Clinton’s Attorney General, Janet Reno, who then read it privately and published a 4-page letter based on her private reading stating her conclusion that President Clinton committed no crimes.”

Kerr’s framing of the situation struck a nerve: The tweet was liked more than 69,000 times, and retweeted more than 22,000 times. (One of the retweeters was Monica Lewinsky, who added her own perspective to Kerr’s imagining: “if. fucking. only,” she responded.) Imagine if, it turned out, captured something about a report that continues to hover in a purgatorial place. The thing is done but not really; it is completed but not, as yet, conclusive; it exists in a state of suspended animation. The House of Representatives, in mid-March, voted 420–0 to release the report—a display of bipartisanship that itself typically exists, these days, merely in imagine if terms. On Tuesday, however, Trump described the ongoing calls to share the document as a “disgrace” and a “waste of time.”

A report that was conducted, ostensibly, on behalf of the public, its full contents kept invisible to the public: It is yet another shock that is thoroughly unsurprising, another outrageous thing that does its angering out in the open, with impunity. It has become a running joke over the past year—the summer of scam. Scam season. The best scammers of 2018, ranked. Grift in the air; graft in the ether; cons, thriving in times of turmoil, having their way with the weary and the hopeful.

But the language of the scam can be misleading, precisely because the logic of the scam has permeated American life so completely that it has found its way to the Justice Department itself. The particular brand of absurdity at play in the report, the one that translated a multi-hundred-page work of investigation into an announcement of “Total EXONERATION,” is a rule much more than it is an exception. For every version of a scam that can be neatly categorized as illegal (or allegedly so)—Theranos, the Fyre Festival, Enron, the latest college-admissions scandal, a portion of the best scammers of 2018, etc.—there are many others that live in the liminal space of the lower-grade swindle. “Scam,” in that way, becomes its own false promise. It is too hopeful. It is overly naive. It assumes a world that does not exist. There’s so much that becomes fair game, after all, within a game that is rigged.

Theranos, the blood-testing company that went from “great hope” to “great hoax” almost overnight, has recently transformed into something else entirely: a media event. There were the newspaper articles and the magazine articles and then the book and then the ABC documentary podcast and then the HBO documentary and then, in due time, the Jennifer Lawrence–starring feature film. I’d call it overkill, except that having read the stories and heard the podcast and watched the doc and read the book, I have found myself, like a vulture on the savannah, ravenous and desperate and craving more—out for blood.

Why the appeal, especially when there are so many others scams-made-into-stories on offer? Part of it might have to do with the mechanics of this particular con: Any scam that manages to succeed as a scam, if you squint a little when looking at it, will also look pretty similar to … competence. Theranos became a Silicon Valley unicorn, with a valuation stretching to $9 billion-with-a-b, in part through means that are legal. It effectively siloed its workers to prevent intracompany gossip; it was exceptionally litigious with those staffers, and anyone else who might have questions about the company’s workings; its founder, Elizabeth Holmes, charmed investors and power brokers, almost all of them wealthy and white and older and male, until they believed in the stories the company was selling about itself. (The line between “myths” and “lies” can also be a thin one.)

This is all, as can’t-get-enough drama goes, notably bureaucratic. But that is part of the appeal. Critics will sometimes characterize entertainments such as The Social Network and The Martian as competence porn, named for the visceral thrill that comes with watching someone demonstrate both ability and cleverness when tackling a specific task. And to take in the Theranos story is, in a way, to experience a similar catharsis: Holmes and her deputy, Sunny Balwani, were extremely competent at fooling people—right up until the point, of course, when they weren’t.

The Inventor, Alex Gibney’s recent HBO documentary about Theranos, taps explicitly into that idea. Holmes famously—and, in retrospect, infamously—named Theranos’s blood-testing units after Thomas Edison, and Gibney embraces that connection as a central theme. He intersperses the story of the start-up with shaky footage of Edison in his New Jersey laboratory, reminding viewers that Edison was an inventor who was also, by necessity, a tinkerer: “I have not failed,” he said, of all that went into the creation of a functional incandescent light bulb, “I’ve just found 10,000 ways that won’t work.” But the film, in its comparison of Holmes and Edison, suggests that the celebrated inventor was also a scammer of sorts: Edison, too, had to talk up his own ideas, even and especially the most fanciful ones—to win the confidence that becomes a kind of faith—to fail those 10,000 times before the success came along. Myths are fragile things. What is a wild dream, the Theranos story asks, if not a lie that has yet to be made true?  

It’s a perverse question, but one that is effectively—and uncomfortably—at home in this moment of atmospheric frauds. What if Elizabeth Holmes, as her self-authored mythology insisted, really was a second coming of Edison and Henry Ford and Steve Jobs? What if she saw things in a way others did not—and what if she simply needed more funding, more faith, more time? What if she just hadn’t gotten to 10,000 yet? Holmes wasn’t, and she didn’t, and she hadn’t, but in a world that is powered by hot air, the lines can warm and tangle and blur. “First they think you’re crazy, then they fight you, then you change the world,” Holmes said, trying to defend herself and the lies that she’d told in the name of creating a better life for everyone.

Shortly after The Inventor premiered on HBO, the fourth season of the darkly comedic drama Billions premiered on Showtime. The series, centering on the cat-and-mouse game played between a hedge-fund founder (Damian Lewis) and the legal system that tries to hunt him down, began as an anthropology of wealth, detailing the lives of the 1 percent with a precision that mingled tragedy and high comedy. But the show has expanded far beyond its original purview of New York City, and the Southern District, and the easy expanses of Greenwich, Connecticut. Its plot now involves a Russian oligarch and a Middle Eastern sheik, broadening the show from its original cops-and-robbers drama to offer an indictment of a financial system that implicates and shapes the lives of people around the world.

The central joke of Billions is that in a show nominally concerned with justice, but actually premised on competition, it becomes effectively impossible to tell where the legal tricks end and the illegal ones begin. An early episode of the new season features an extended, vaguely absurdist plot line involving Chuck Rhoades (Paul Giamatti), the prosecutor, who tries—through deal making and influence peddling and occasional begging—to leverage his ability to dole out New York City park-anywhere cards. The item in question, which is large and laminated and whiffs of the cheery humilities of a FedEx/Kinko’s store, becomes an object of scorn to those Chuck attempts to offer it to. (“Already got one,” Donny Deutsch, making a cameo as himself, tells the law enforcer, rolling his eyes. “For each of my cars.”)
It’s a small joke that gets to the larger one: If you lose your leverage, in this environment, you lose everything else. You are what you are worth, and Chuck, that sad little card suggests, is currently worth very little. To watch Billions, a show that appends the broad arc of Breaking Bad to a philosophy that insists that companies are people, is to be reminded yet again of the vanishing thinness of the lines that divide corporate greed from all-out fraud. It is to be reminded of Theranos, and Bernie Madoff, and Anna Delvey, and Billy McFarland, and Fred Trump, and Fred Trump’s son. It is to watch a system get indicted one episode at a time. Is Chuck a high-ranking law-enforcement official or a con man? Is Bobby Axelrod, the hedge-funder whose money helps the world spin on its crooked axis, a scammer or a quintessential success story of swaggering American capitalism? The comedy of it all—the tragedy of it all—is that they are both at once.  



Early in the new season of Big Little Lies, Celeste (played by Nicole Kidman) goes to see her therapist, Dr. Reisman (Robin Weigert). Celeste has been having vivid, alarming dreams as she processes the death of her abusive husband, Perry (Alexander Skarsgård); the role her friends played; and her own contradictory feelings about losing him. Kidman plays Celeste almost in miniature—her voice is hushed to a whisper and she hardly moves, but her hands are clenched as she toys with her wedding ring. At Dr. Reisman’s request, Celeste replays in her mind one of the times her husband beat her; she silently cries as she does so. Then, reluctantly, she imagines the scene again, only with her friend Madeline (Reese Witherspoon) in Celeste’s place. This time, the altered memory makes Celeste erupt: She shouts—a ferocious sound that comes from her core—and pounds her fists on the coffee table in pure rage.

When Big Little Lies debuted in 2017 as a miniseries, the scenes that belied its showy, Monterey-mommies-and-murder veneer were the moments when Celeste was in therapy, grappling with Perry’s violence and her seeming addiction to him. Painstakingly, over seven episodes, Dr. Reisman helped Celeste see the disconnect between the life she curated on Facebook (with her model-handsome husband and towheaded twins) and the reality: Perry’s abuse was escalating to the point where, if she didn’t leave him, he would likely kill her. Between Kidman’s tight, interior performance and Weigert’s gentle but ruthless portrayal of a woman shredding Celeste’s layers of denial, Big Little Lies gave a profound treatment to domestic abuse and its impact.

That’s not to say David E. Kelley and Jean-Marc Vallée’s HBO series (based on a novel by Liane Moriarty) wasn’t gratifying for other reasons, chief among them its architecture porn, its monstrous depictions of overprivileged parenting, and the lamentable travails of a first grader named Amabella. For these reasons, and for the fact that its primary characters were rich, beautiful mothers (and that Frozen gift bags and perimenopausal yoga classes were plot points), Big Little Lies was written off in some corners as a soapy potboiler or a guilty pleasure, analyses that tended to miss how forceful and perceptive its writing could be.

It’s harder now to ignore, watching the early episodes of Season 2, that Big Little Lies is offering up some of the best psychological storytelling on television. The filmmaker Andrea Arnold (American Honey) has taken over direction from Vallée, and Meryl Streep has joined the cast as Perry’s mother, Mary Louise, which allows Big Little Lies to consider a question: Where, exactly, does damage come from? What kinds of emotional wounds, if untreated, can fester into violence? In scene after scene, the show contemplates the imprints and, sometimes, the scars people leave on one another. Its central female characters, now enshrined locally as the “Monterey Five” after their proximity to Perry’s death, aren’t entirely sympathetic. (“I don’t give a fuck about homeless people,” Madeline screams in one scene, NorCal’s very own Marie Antoinette.) But the series does them the service of illuminating how they got this way.

Somehow, this kind of rigorous, thoughtful probing still manages to coexist in perfect harmony with the show’s barbed sense of humor, an incongruence that Streep, in particular, seems to relish. (The heavy lifting comes from Laura Dern’s Renata, a wiry bundle of couture and overreaction described by one teacher as “the Medusa of Monterey.”) In the final episode of the first season, Perry was pushed down a staircase by Bonnie (Zoë Kravitz) after she saw him viciously beating Celeste outside a school fundraiser. Seconds before, Jane (Shailene Woodley), encountering Perry for the first time, had recognized him as the man who had raped her years ago, and who had fathered her son. To protect Bonnie, Celeste, and Jane, the five women colluded, telling the police that Perry had fallen accidentally. They weren’t charged, but Detective Quinlan (Merrin Dungey) seemed certain enough that they were lying—an ambiguous end to a miniseries that ended up coming back for more.

In the new episodes, Kravitz’s Bonnie is most jarred by the events of the previous season. An earth mother with an impenetrable aura of self-containment, she’s been deeply traumatized by her direct involvement in Perry’s death and her inability to share what happened with her husband and daughter. Madeline, by contrast, is breezily unaltered, though the waters of discontent in her personal life continue to churn. Renata faces two of her worst nightmares at the same time, one of which—naturally—concerns the well-being of Amabella. Celeste can’t reconcile her relief at Perry’s death with her sense that life is duller without him. Jane, liberated from her flashbacks about the man who assaulted her, makes some overtures into dating, although she’s still hesitant to let people get close.

The mystery last season swirled around who exactly had died at Otter Bay Elementary School’s fateful Elvis Presley–and–Audrey Hepburn–themed fundraiser, and who had killed them. This time around, the central question commanding the series is how its characters got to be the way they are—a less suspenseful conundrum maybe, but a more interesting one. In despair over Bonnie’s mute, hollowed-out semblance, her husband, Nathan (James Tupper), calls her mother (Crystal Fox), whose visit brings up allusions to past family trauma. Madeline, on hearing that her eldest daughter (played by Kathryn Newton) refuses to go to college, has to come to terms with her insecurities about her own lack of education. Celeste’s distance from her own family, exposed in one flashback, means that the twins are all she has left, and she’s terrified that they might end up taking after their father.

Which brings us to Streep’s Mary Louise, a folksy enigma in greige cardigans and ferrety prosthetic teeth, who potters around Monterey making all her rudest inner observations out loud. (“You’re very short,” she tells Madeline. “I don’t mean that in a negative way. Maybe I do. I find little people to be untrustworthy.”) Mary Louise is deeply suspicious about her son’s death, but she’s also a figure of suspicion for viewers, since she’s the woman who raised Perry, a sadist and sexual predator. It’s patently obvious to everyone around Celeste, though, that she’s withholding the truth. “A family is supposed to be open and honest with each other,” Celeste says in one scene. “I don’t think we’re that kind of family,” her son Max replies, intuitive to a fault.

The acting is so good across the board in Big Little Lies that supporting characters such as Tupper’s Nathan and Adam Scott’s Ed can go unnoticed, even though they’re valuable players in the strange, intermittently menacing theater of Monterey parenting. As spoiled as viewers are to have Oscar winners such as Witherspoon, Kidman, and Streep sparring on camera for our enjoyment, to have Dern too feels like sprinkles on a stagecraft sundae. She’s the most ludicrously extra character on premium cable, wearing full scarlet lace to a court hearing and responding to Otter Bay’s climate-change messaging by threatening to buy every kid a “fucking polar bear.” Arnold, if less obviously so than Vallée, employs the Pacific Ocean to underscore the roiling energy of the setting and the forces that are always threatening to break the town open. But the dazzle of Big Little Lies—the money and the stars and the searing comedy of modern manners—can’t override how incisive the show is about its characters, their damage, and their desires.



Sally Rooney’s new novel, Normal People, was recently featured in a Vanity Fair spread of “this season’s best new books and the must-have bags to stash them in.” In the picture, it leans confidingly against a Mansur Gavriel tote bag in a pleasing highlighter yellow (price: $595).

The person who owns that combination of things would be rich, tasteful, and smart, the kind of person who has a well-paying job (creative director? brand consultant?) that still leaves her time to read novels and carry a whimsically yellow purse to lunch with friends, who would have all also read and liked Normal People.

Rooney is a self-described Marxist, and I suspect that she would enjoy Vanity Fair’s neat illustration of a point she makes in Normal People about the way books can function as cultural currency. “It was culture as class performance,” thinks a character at a reading, “literature fetishized for its ability to take educated people on false emotional journeys, so that they might afterward feel superior to the uneducated people whose emotional journeys they liked to read about.”

Though Rooney’s characters have scalding contempt for capitalism and its trappings, it’s easy to see how Normal People could have snuck into the handbag slideshow. Politics in Rooney’s novel are often ambient rather than explicit, submerged under the surface of a love story about, as Rooney writes, “two people who, over the course of several years, apparently could not leave one another alone,” Marianne and Connell, who spend four years alternately pursuing and withdrawing from each other.

One critic recently noted that the politics of Rooney’s novels were largely “gestural,” with airy mentions of Gaza or austerity protests but not much radical substance. Another suggested that her politics were essentially decorative, “more setting than subject.” I disagree. I don’t think Rooney is garnishing her love story with politics. She’s embedding politics closely and rigorously in the love story, showing how relationships can function like miniature states, and how political principles can work on an intimate scale, in the interactions of two, three, or four people.

In interviews, Rooney often talks about growing up hearing Marx’s dictum “From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs” from her parents, and absorbing it as if it were a universal rule, maybe something Jesus said, or, as one interviewer from The Cut put it, something somebody might embroider on a pillow. In Normal People, characters have different things at different times: money, social capital, looks. The novel suggests the possibility of a setup in which these advantages are shared and redistributed according to need. Call it a Marxism of the heart.

Love across class is a common theme in novels. In Jane Austen, clearly a model for Rooney, people are fixed in their status, or can move in one direction or the other: a person of lower status (Elizabeth, in Pride and Prejudice) marrying one of higher status (Darcy), or one of lower status (Wentworth, in Persuasion) earning up into a higher bracket (Anne’s). But what Rooney has is something different—a seismographer’s attention to the dips and tremors of social value, the way that, as the British writer Olivia Laing wrote, “beauty, intelligence, and class are currencies that fluctuate as unpredictably as pounds and dollars.”

At the beginning of the novel, when the characters are in high school, Connell’s stock is higher. Marianne is rich, and, yes, Connell’s mother cleans her house, but she is aloof and odd, someone who “wears ugly thick-soled flat shoes and doesn’t put makeup on her face.” Connell is athletic and well liked. They have an immediate attraction, but he keeps it secret because he is afraid of what his friends will think.

After high school, when they both attend Trinity College, the seesaw reverses: Marianne’s gawkiness becomes glamour, and Connell feels out of place against a backdrop of waxed hunting jackets and champagne. Marianne’s status “elevated Connell to the status of rich-adjacent: someone for whom surprise birthday parties are thrown and cushy jobs are procured out of nowhere.” The father of one of her new friends “was one of the people who had caused the financial crisis—not figuratively, one of the actual people involved.”

They circle, always seeming to misunderstand each other at some crucial moment. At one point, Connell loses a job and can’t pay rent for the summer in Dublin. He tries to ask to stay with Marianne, but she thinks that he is saying he wants to leave town. They break up. This represents her failure of imagination and his failure of courage, but also suggests that independence is not an uncomplicated virtue. The solution is obvious, and she has something he needs. Why shouldn’t people give one another food, and money, and places to stay?

Eventually they come into a kind of mutual dependence, something fundamentally at odds with the mainstream, if hazy, acceptance of independence as an obvious good (and, particularly, a feminist good). The message of the current moment can often seem to be: Limit your emotional labor; be your own best advocate; don’t let your relationships compromise autonomy or empowerment. “How strange to feel herself so completely under the control of another person, but also how ordinary,” Marianne thinks. “No one can be independent of other people completely, so why not give up the attempt, she thought, go running in the other direction, depend on people for everything, allow them to depend on you, why not.”

Rooney allows Connell to come to Marianne’s rescue when she is threatened by angry or violent men, not once but three times: when she is groped in a nightclub, bullied by her boyfriend (the one whose dad caused the financial crisis), and, finally, abused by her brother. A novel espousing independence as a straightforward virtue might have made her come to her own rescue. Connell isn’t helping her as an archetypical knight, but he is still a man and aware of the power this confers him in particular circumstances. The book suggests that people can use their advantages for one another—that personal qualities, abilities, status, and other advantages can act like wealth or goods in a socialist society, for common benefit. This extends far outside of gender, of course: Though Marianne initially fails to see that Connell needs a place to stay, she offers him other things, including social protection and money when he’s been mugged. From each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs.

In some ways, Normal People feels like an extension of Rooney’s flashier first novel, Conversations With Friends, which follows two college students who form a fraught relationship with an older couple. Frances and her best friend/ex-girlfriend Bobbi have long, drily funny and unresolved text and IM conversations about love and capitalism. Here’s an oft-quoted passage:

Bobbi: if you look at love as something other than an interpersonal phenomenon

Bobbi: and try to understand it as a social value system

Bobbi: it’s both antithetical to capitalism, in that it challenges the axiom of selfishness

Bobbi: which dictates the whole logic of inequality

Bobbi: and yet also it’s subservient and facilitatory

[…]

me: capitalism harnesses “love” for profit

me: love is the discursive practice and unpaid labor is the effect

me: but I mean, I get that, I’m anti love as such

Bobbi: that’s vapid frances

It’s meant to be funny, and it is, but it also gestures at an actual problem they see. Shouldn’t you give away your love and care for free? But doesn’t capitalism depend on and exploit that instinct? Bobbi and Frances don’t figure it out. Toward the end of Conversations With Friends, after a falling out, Frances emails Bobbi: “Is it possible we could develop an alternative model of loving each other?” The novel ends not long after.

Normal People answers the question posed in Conversations With Friends. It suggests that despite everything, despite the helplessness that Rooney’s characters feel in the face of global capitalism, and class differences, and the judgments of others, radical politics can work on a small scale and are worth pursuing even if the world’s broader inequalities feel both inevitable and unsolvable. Normal People proposes that a merciful and just country can still exist, even if only in the space between friends.



Saturday Night Live opened the last episode of its 44th season with a sketch featuring Alec Baldwin as Donald Trump, sitting in the Oval Office, telling a few jokes, and then singing a song with a coterie of characters from his administration. That might sound like par for the course for the show, but it was actually Baldwin’s first appearance in character since March, when SNL mocked the president’s reaction to Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s report. Almost three years into a presidency one could charitably describe as newsworthy, the best this show could come up with for a season finale was Trump singing Queen’s “Don’t Stop Me Now” and shimmying behind his desk, as if daring the audience to, well, stop him.

The brewing news going into last night’s episode was that Kate McKinnon, the indisputable star of this era of SNL, might be departing for greener pastures. Her contract is up as of now and she may be ready to move on to movie stardom like countless breakout actors before her. But if this was her last hurrah, there was little sign of it, and certainly no grand send-off like the ones Kristen Wiig and Bill Hader got. Instead, there was the same slightly lackluster mix of topical material and unmemorable goofy sketch writing that has defined the show in recent years. SNL has survived for so many decades by knowing when to pull the trigger on a revamp, and Baldwin’s dismal karaoke work last night was the surest sign yet that something needs to change.





What drove it home was the political “cold open” sketch (which, as usual, kicked off the show): It gathered all of SNL’s lazy gags about the Trump administration into one sing-along presentation. Beck Bennett showed up as Mike Pence to supply some uninspired homosexual innuendo; Alex Moffat and Mikey Day did their “Dumb and Dumber” routine as Trump’s oldest sons; and then Robert De Niro shuffled in, all made up as Mueller, to stand there and do nothing in particular (Baldwin as Trump waved him off, yelling “No collusion!”).

It was about as laugh-free as the cold open of the previous year’s finale, which also involved Trump, his sons, and Mueller, in a Sopranos spoof, mocking the idea that whatever resolution was promised from the special counsel’s investigation might never arrive. A year later, they’re all singing “Don’t Stop Me Now” together, rather than “Don’t Stop Believin’,” but the message remains the same. “I don’t know what’s next for me, but I wouldn’t be Donald Trump if I didn’t say, ‘Tune in next season to see who lives and who dies,’” Baldwin joked, satirizing both the president’s propensity for firing Cabinet members and the actor’s own professed unwillingness to stay in the role.

Baldwin probably should move along, as his heart really hasn’t been in the role since Trump won the presidency. A reshuffle is also badly needed behind the “Weekend Update” desk, where Colin Jost and Michael Che have never quite managed to distinguish themselves after five seasons on the job. Some of the other sketches in last night’s episode pointed to opportunities that SNL let go stale over the years. Kyle Mooney, whose strange digital shorts initially made him seem like a weird and woolly replacement for Andy Samberg, has gotten to do less and less of them of late; the return of his recurring “romance” with Leslie Jones felt like a pale imitation of the more esoteric humor he used to favor. Even the appearance of one of McKinnon’s better recurring characters, the frequent alien abductee Ms. Rafferty, felt fully exhausted.

The finale’s host was Paul Rudd, a capable SNL favorite who is no stranger to weird sketch comedy, but he largely disappeared into the background, like so many other talented hosts this season. The only truly memorable SNL episodes this year all involved trips into the show’s brighter past—the return of Seth Meyers in October; the second appearance of John Mulaney, in March; and most recently, a long-awaited hosting appearance from Adam Sandler. As it settles into middle age (with Season 45 on the horizon), SNL will always be guilty of occasionally looking back, and fans can’t be blamed for their nostalgia. But it’s hard to know what people will remember fondly from the past few years of the show.



In Joanna Hogg’s new film, The Souvenir, the 21-year-old protagonist, Julie (played by Honor Swinton Byrne), lives in a bubble. She strains against this fact, telling her film-school professors and the interesting people she meets at parties that she wants to venture beyond her sphere, to capture real life on her camera, to document the economic hardships gripping 1980s Britain. But Hogg, who’s telling the autobiographical story of her own experiences as a young woman, takes pains to show how hermetic Julie’s life actually is.

The Souvenir is a coming-of-age film about the various rites of passage into adulthood—living alone, falling in love—but it’s also about the stasis and adversity Julie has to fight at the same time. It’s a staggering movie from a director who has never had a major release in the United States before, one filled with such insight and promise that Hogg is already at work on a sequel. In telling Julie’s story, Hogg harnesses one of her favorite cinematic devices—long scenes of dialogue that unfold with barely a camera movement—to delve into a relationship that tempts, tortures, and transforms her main character in ways both good and bad.

The film charts Julie’s romance with a confident, posh-seeming gentleman named Anthony (Tom Burke), who shakes up Julie’s life as they begin a passionate but troubled affair that distracts her from her studies. Hogg creates a world that sings with ordinary details. The Souvenir takes place almost entirely indoors, mostly in Julie’s apartment, which gives the movie a locked-in feeling. Though viewers wouldn’t necessarily be able to tell, nearly every set was built inside a colossal airplane hangar—a location that itself features in some of the final shots. In these later scenes, Hogg treats the hangar as a kind of metaphorical shelter, a chrysalis for Julie to break out of as she learns to stop being dependent on the people around her.

Julie especially relies on Anthony, who, within minutes of meeting her, is coolly deconstructing her idealistic notions of making documentaries about Britain’s working class. Anthony works for the Foreign Office and has a debonair cruel streak that lends him a bad-boy appeal. He tells Julie that she’s a “freak,” not the typical girl she presents herself as, and she reacts with a kind of faux-offended delight, happy to hear that there’s something special about her. Hogg depicts their affair with an unsparing eye, letting the audience instantly see Anthony’s charisma and fatal flaws while also conveying Julie’s obliviousness to the latter.

As the relationship between Julie and Anthony grows more intense, Hogg takes time to linger on their conversations about art, society, and what they want to do with their lives. Her prior films, particularly the wonderful domestic dramas Unrelated and Archipelago (both of which star a young Tom Hiddleston), are similarly intimate works. They demand that the viewer lean in and notice nuances in dialogue and body language as Hogg depicts the many ways middle-class British people often struggle to express themselves fully. Julie’s search for artistic meaning seems as tied to the politics of the time (during the fraught Margaret Thatcher years) as it is to her genteel upbringing.

Tilda Swinton, another longtime collaborator of Hogg’s, plays Julie’s mother, Rosalind—a doting, if somewhat remote, figure who supports her daughter financially but has a limited notion of what she craves emotionally. Aside from Rosalind, the supporting cast is mostly one-scene drop-ins: folks playing fellow film students, or pals Julie sees at the occasional party. Once Anthony is on the scene, the action locks in on their pairing, the ways it changes Julie, and the repercussions when their relationship begins to fall apart. The stillness of Hogg’s camera belies her careful attention to blocking; Anthony’s face is often hidden from the audience, his back to the camera, and the edges around him are fuzzy, almost as if he’s been summoned from a blurry reminiscence.

That naturalistic feeling, of a life that’s being passionately and painfully lived, is what makes this movie so extraordinary. Hogg is not a sensationalistic filmmaker, but rather someone who can convey tremendous amounts of emotion through total tranquility on-screen. While The Souvenir may be many American viewers’ first engagement with her, it won’t be their last.



Star Wars: Galaxy’s Edge hadn’t even opened yet, and the trash cans were already disgusting. Brown-green streaks ran down the sides of the bins in Disneyland’s newest, most hyped zone, but standard messes like kid spit-up and splattered Mickey bars weren’t to blame. These stains had the look of overflowing effluent, rotted in the sun and impervious to power washing. Galaxy’s Edge is the five-years-in-the-making supposed future of theme parks, and its first impression is not entirely a pristine one.

Gunk and junk are, in fact, the best part of this new Star Wars spectacle. Just as Walt Disney’s artisans selected sherbet pink to coat Sleeping Beauty’s Castle when the Anaheim, California, resort opened in 1955, some Imagineer must have agonized over the shade and shape of the scum for the Galaxy’s Edge trash cans. The 14-acre park expansion is stunning not because of its sci-fi gimmicks, but because of its shabby-chic detail. The Millennium Falcon’s interior resembles an aborted condo rehab, all drywall patches and exposed wiring. You could spend a morning counting the blaster craters on the spaceport’s stucco-like walls. In the corner of the central bazaar stands the corpse of an R2-D2 cousin, un-domed and ash-scorched, looking less like space-age tech than like a charcoal grill at a poorly maintained public beach.

The manifold crud is a sign that Disney, stewards of George Lucas’s franchise since purchasing it for $4.05 billion in 2012, understands the gut appeal of the Star Wars universe. The discourse around the original movies got clogged up with Jungian analysis arguing that Luke Skywalker’s journey scratched a primal itch for “chosen one” tales, and while that read isn’t wrong, the plot was not the most relevant factor in A New Hope’s influence. Star Wars’ breakthrough, really, came in look and sound. Lucas’s team brined Flash Gordon sleekness in the future-thinking-but-ubiquitous textures of the 1970s: concrete brutalism, post-Vietnam military surplus, sticky linoleum, S&M rubber. Though imbued with the mystical Force and populated by muppets traveling at hyper-speed, the galaxy far, far away came off like one that Earth’s people could—and maybe already do—live in. Four decades later, Star Wars still feels like the ruins of the now.

Since 1977, video games, novels, toys, comic books, and one catastrophic Christmas special have indulged fans’ desire to step into the screen. Now Disneyland offers those fans a full-body experience: a walk-on movie set where the luminescent cocktails are drinkable and the flight-jacketed extras banter back. Galaxy’s Edge thus might be the ultimate culmination of Star Wars’ original promise, and it’s no coincidence that it’s been achieved under the auspices of Disney. Mickey Mouse’s animation studio long ago ballooned into a would-be-monopolistic holding company of many of pop culture’s beloved mythologies, and its trophy case is its theme parks. In Disney’s lands, Cinderella and Nemo the fish and Captain America do not merely share the same corporate ownership; rather, they share something intrinsic and ideological. For $97 a ticket, enchantment—across genres—ceases to be fiction.

Star Wars was first brought into the stable in 1987, when Disney inked a licensing deal with Lucas and opened the simulator ride Star Tours. With its travel-agency posters and Pan Am Airways conceit—complete with a safety video from a flight attendant in Leia-like hair buns—it was a campy-great product of its era (one that was ruined for me by the recent addition of 3-D glasses and prequel-trilogy tie-ins, or maybe just by me no longer being 10). By zipping guests to and from various planets and only glancingly referencing the human characters of Lucas’s saga, the ride also recognized that Star Wars appealed as much for setting as for story. Today’s biggest blockbuster entertainments have taken a similar world-building approach. The original “cinematic universe,” the galaxy far, far away, thus now needs more than a ride. It needs a land—one as scuffed as Lucas’s looked on-screen, which is to say, one as scuffed as our own.

The measure of Galaxy’s Edge’s unconventional theme-park ambitions might be seen in what it doesn’t yet provide: excellent thrill rides. Of the two planned attractions, one is still under construction. The other, Millennium Falcon: Smugglers Run, is in the great Disneyland tradition of having a quirky queue that is as—or more—fun as the ride itself. Riders line up through a cavernous interstellar body shop and eventually arrive in the hull of the Falcon, where they can pose for pictures at the iconic holo–chess board. Intermittently, loud noises and steam erupt from pipes in the wall, and line-standers can flip switches to “repair” the sprung gasket. So deeply did I get into the habit of pressing every visible button that a worker had to stop me after I unwittingly buzzed something on the actual ride-control panel. Role-playing has its perils.

The ride itself puts visitors in a team of six crew members with assigned roles: pilots, gunners, engineers. With its famous paneled windshield and actual working toggle switches, the Falcon’s cockpit is something out of nerd Valhalla. But after liftoff, the experience becomes that of a chaotic video game (it even runs on the popular Unreal Engine software). Gunners and engineers are frenetically torn between experiencing the visuals and turning to use the controls, which are awkwardly placed to their side. At the end, players get a score based on accuracy, their smuggling haul, and how much damage the ship sustained. The two times I rode, though, I left not with the pride of accomplishment but with a minor case of motion sickness and a major case of bewilderment. The Falcon isn’t that far off from a flight simulator you’d find in a Dave & Buster’s.

But g-force amusement isn’t the point of new theme parks these days; immersion is. You need to really feel as though you’ve stroller-pushed your tykes into another dimension—one where the sights, scents, and small talk all reinforce one another. That’s the idea behind the Wizarding World of Harry Potter at Universal Studios, a J. K. Rowling–approved model of the bustling Diagon Alley and the wintry Hogsmeade Village, and Disney World’s Pandora, the Avatar planet where reportedly the mountains really do look like they’re levitating. Disneyland was, of course, immersive all along. The kids who pull the sword from the stone in Fantasyland, for example, really do think they’re King Arthur. But Galaxy’s Edge pushes further. Imagine if the strangers around those would-be Arthurs really did treat them as royalty for the rest of the day.

Rather than send visitors to known locales such as Tatooine or Naboo, Disney built out the heretofore undepicted planet of Batuu. There, the dusty-looking trading burg of Black Spire Outpost attracts all the essential Star Wars demographics: canvas-clothed good-guy pilots, all-too-Nazi-like bad-guy squads, toddling and guileless droids, and fuzzy-scaly aliens. Some of these are park employees—or, ahem, “cast members”—and some are animatronic fixtures. In contrast to the stand-and-pose photo ops with Donald Duck common elsewhere in Disneyland, the likes of Chewbacca and Kylo Ren can be seen living their life, whether rolling dice in a cantina in the former’s case or humorlessly interrogating locals in the latter’s.

You can play a part, too, though the jury’s out on whether it’ll be an interesting one. Disney touts that a downloadable phone app will let visitors complete quests within the park, thereby aligning themselves with the dark or the light. Cast members might change how they treat you accordingly. The live-action role-playing sounds exactly like what I, a recovering Dungeons & Dragons addict, have dreamt of all my life. But the app—at least in its partially activated form on the media-preview day—was not that engaging, with missions coming in the form of simple puzzles that had only a hazy relationship to the physical landscape. (I know it’s aimed at kids, but kids today are, I imagine, more discerning with phone games than I am.) It was slightly more satisfying to use the app’s camera to translate the alien language on shop signs or on thermal-detonator-shaped Coke bottles. In person, cast interactions were jokey and tentative, as if they were at a murder-mystery dinner party. The reward for me correctly employing a secret passphrase with a Resistance commander who approached me was a collectible card that is likely to end up destroyed next laundry day.

Where interactivity really worked was in the shopping experience; it’s not really a diss to say that Galaxy’s Edge is, at its core, a very cool mall. There are unusual-looking food courts hawking items such as Endorian Tip-Yip (crisp chicken with a colorful potato mash) and the blue milk whose ingredients fans have wondered about since 1977 (here, it’s a frozen, candy-like concoction that not only looks like slurried Windex but also kind of tastes like it). The souvenir shops are particularly creative. At the droid depot, you make like an Ugnaught in Cloud City and pick parts off a conveyor belt to assemble into a take-home friend for $99.99 a pop (this is brilliant). There’s also a lightsaber dealership with a fun, interactive concept: It’s hidden, speakeasy-like, so as to avoid scrutiny from the First Order. “What kind of scrap are you looking for?” a merchant at the weapons-dealer-cum-junk-stall asked me with a slight wink-wink. Unconvincingly, I replied, “Um … something that swings?”

Furtively, she presented laminated sheets showing the various lightsaber classes available. The experience felt very much like a drug deal, which is certainly a novel sensation for Disneyland to be providing. But accessing the actual facility where the sabers get forged required an appointment and an up-front payment of $200. I settled for a $17 alien at the pet shop around the corner. It was only a squeeze toy, but the employees nevertheless handed it over with a carrier cage and a warning: “You be careful with that.”

If I wasn’t feeling fully immersed, I was, certainly, very impressed. The land is sensorially glee-making in the way that Star Wars is supposed to be. In fact, the biggest obstacle to the adoption of Galaxy’s Edge’s official app might be that visitors will be too busy Instagramming gorgeous craggy vistas, Air and Space Museum–quality spacecraft, and the hilariously large Podracer engine being used to roast alien-meat shawarma.

The eerie fun of walking around the land, I realized after a while, came as much from the feeling of stepping into Star Wars as from noticing resemblances to our own planet. At a panel presentation, the Lucasfilm vice president and executive creative director Doug Chiang explained that the Star Wars visual language was set in the ’70s by the conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie, whose use of domes, spheres, and spires helped differentiate this saga’s look. But Chiang also talked about the earthly research that went into Galaxy’s Edge. The jagged landscape of Batuu is modeled after Arizona’s petrified forests. The land’s designers consulted 19th-century paintings of bazaars and even took location-scouting trips to Istanbul and Marrakech. “The trick to designing Star Wars is that 80 or 90 percent of it is real,” Chiang said. “The [other] percent is the freshness,” where freshness translates into, for example, an extra eyeball on a creature, or a distorted sense of scale for a landscape.

Chiang shared one particularly striking image from his location-scouting research trips: a facade of apartment or office windows tangled with extension cords and air-conditioning units. An unbeautiful image of urban chaos and jerry-rigged modernity, it indeed felt like something from Star Wars. It reminded me of the times I’ve come across decaying shipping equipment in an industrial seaport or the concrete slabs of a municipal building and thought, Didn’t Luke Skywalker interact with this? Galaxy’s Edge, lovingly grime-caked and even tangled with power lines of its own, recognizes that Star Wars is about such moments of recognition. It’s another chapter in the postmodern mystery of why people talk about fictional universes in terms of “authenticity” or “realism.”

The general Disneyland aesthetic, of course, is more synonymous with squeaky-clean fantasy than space garbage. But browsing the park the day I visited Galaxy’s Edge, I was reminded of how much Walt’s vision was like what Chiang said about Star Wars: Amazement is achieved by an 80/20 blend of the real and the fantastical. Disney’s Adventureland is a colonialist pastiche of “exotic”—Polynesian, South American, African—architectures. Frontierland is the Wild West scrubbed of murder; Critter Country is a cartoonish Appalachia populated by talking bears. Pull back and think about the fictional franchises that have defined pop culture lately, and the 80/20 rule clearly applies there, too. Game of Thrones stood out not for its swords and sorcery, but for its application of real history and moral consequence to that setting. Marvel’s world is also our own, plus superpowers.

To enter and leave Galaxy’s Edge, I was escorted through Disneyland’s backlot, which is far less manicured than the park itself, but almost equally eye-popping. It’s a thicket of forklifts and wires and hoses and scaffolding, populated by security workers and electricians and cast members—in mouse and princess costumes—emerging from zippy shuttles and blocky trailers. Star Wars’ spaceports and cantinas make viewers marvel anew at the bustle of places like this, at the living, breathing organism that is civilization. Galaxy’s Edge can’t quite re-create the complexity that Lucas’s works point at, but what could? If you can’t get a ticket to the park, just look outside.

1. The Disappearance

At 12:42 a.m. on the quiet, moonlit night of March 8, 2014, a Boeing 777-200ER operated by Malaysia Airlines took off from Kuala Lumpur and turned toward Beijing, climbing to its assigned cruising altitude of 35,000 feet. The designator for Malaysia Airlines is MH. The flight number was 370. Fariq Hamid, the first officer, was flying the airplane. He was 27 years old. This was a training flight for him, the last one; he would soon be fully certified. His trainer was the pilot in command, a man named Zaharie Ahmad Shah, who at 53 was one of the most senior captains at Malaysia Airlines. In Malaysian style, he was known by his first name, Zaharie. He was married and had three adult children. He lived in a gated development. He owned two houses. In his first house he had installed an elaborate Microsoft flight simulator.

"It’s not true that no one needs you anymore.”

These words came from an elderly woman sitting behind me on a late-night flight from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C. The plane was dark and quiet. A man I assumed to be her husband murmured almost inaudibly in response, something to the effect of “I wish I was dead.”

Again, the woman: “Oh, stop saying that.”

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

I didn’t mean to eavesdrop, but couldn’t help it. I listened with morbid fascination, forming an image of the man in my head as they talked. I imagined someone who had worked hard all his life in relative obscurity, someone with unfulfilled dreams—perhaps of the degree he never attained, the career he never pursued, the company he never started.

Arguments before the United States Court of Appeals are usually dry, esoteric, and nerdy. What would it take to make one go viral? This week, in a clip that launched a million angry Facebook posts, we found out. It took a lawyer for the United States telling a panel of incredulous Ninth Circuit judges that it is “safe and sanitary” to confine immigrant children in facilities without soap or toothbrushes and to make them sleep on concrete floors under bright lights.

This assertion generated widespread outrage. Sarah Fabian, the senior attorney in the Department of Justice’s Office of Immigration Litigation who uttered it, was instantly excoriated online. As fate would have it, the clip of her argument went viral at the same time as a new wave of reports of brutal and inhumane conditions at immigrant confinement centers. It also immediately followed the raucous debate over Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez referring to the confinement centers as concentration camps. The juxtaposition suggested, misleadingly, that the Trump administration was explicitly justifying the worst sorts of child mistreatment we were seeing on the news.

In the faint predawn light, the ship doesn’t look unusual. It is one more silhouette looming pier-side at Naval Base San Diego, a home port of the U.S. Pacific Fleet. And the scene playing out in its forward compartment, as the crew members ready themselves for departure, is as old as the Navy itself. Three sailors in blue coveralls heave on a massive rope. “Avast!” a fourth shouts. A percussive thwack announces the pull of a tugboat—and 3,000 tons of warship are under way.

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

But now the sun is up, and the differences start to show.

Most obvious is the ship’s lower contour. Built in 2014 from 30 million cans’ worth of Alcoa aluminum, Littoral Combat Ship 10, the USS Gabrielle Giffords, rides high in the water on three separate hulls and is powered like a jet ski—that is, by water-breathing jets instead of propellers. This lets it move swiftly in the coastal shallows (or “littorals,” in seagoing parlance), where it’s meant to dominate. Unlike the older ships now gliding past—guided-missile cruisers, destroyers, amphibious transports—the littoral combat ship was built on the concept of “modularity.” There’s a voluminous hollow in the ship’s belly, and its insides can be swapped out in port, allowing it to set sail as a submarine hunter, minesweeper, or surface combatant, depending on the mission.

Americans often lament the rise of “extreme partisanship,” but this is a poor description of political reality: Far from increasing, Americans’ attachment to their political parties has considerably weakened over the past years. Liberals no longer strongly identify with the Democratic Party and conservatives no longer strongly identify with the Republican Party.

What is corroding American politics is, specifically, negative partisanship: Although most liberals feel conflicted about the Democratic Party, they really hate the Republican Party. And even though most conservatives feel conflicted about the Republican Party, they really hate the Democratic Party.

America’s political divisions are driven by hatred of an out-group rather than love of the in-group. The question is: why?

At least 2,000 children have now been forcibly separated from their parents by the United States government. Their stories are wrenching. Antar Davidson, a former youth-care worker at an Arizona shelter, described to the Los Angeles Times children “huddled together, tears streaming down their faces,” because they believed that their parents were dead. Natalia Cornelio, an attorney with the Texas Human Rights Project, told CNN about a Honduran mother whose child had been ripped away from her while she was breastfeeding. “Inside an old warehouse in South Texas, hundreds of children wait in a series of cages created by metal fencing,” the Associated Press reported. “One cage had 20 children inside.”

On Monday night, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez declared in an Instagram video that “the United States is running concentration camps on our southern border.” The following morning, Liz Cheney tweeted, “Please @AOC do us all a favor and spend just a few minutes learning some actual history. 6 million Jews were exterminated in the Holocaust. You demean their memory and disgrace yourself with comments like this.” After that, the fight was on.

On its face, the fight was about using concentration camp outside the context of the Holocaust. In a subsequent tweet, Ocasio-Cortez linked to an Esquire article noting that the term pre-dates World War II. It quoted the historian Andrea Pitzer, who defines concentration camp as the “mass detention of civilians without trial.” To Ocasio-Cortez’s critics, this was too cute by half. Whatever the term’s historical origins or technical meaning, in American popular discourse concentration camp evokes the Holocaust. By using the term, they argued, the representative from New York was equating Donald Trump’s immigration policies with Nazi genocide, whether she admitted it or not.

About 65 million years ago, shortly after the time of the dinosaurs, a new critter popped up on the evolutionary scene. This “scampering animal,” as researchers described it, was likely small, ate bugs, and had a furry tail. It looked, according to artistic renderings, like an especially aggressive New York City rat. And it had a placenta, an organ that grows deep into the maternal body in order to nourish the fetus during pregnancy.

The rodentlike thing would become the common ancestor of the world’s placental mammals, with descendants that include whales, bats, dogs, and humans, among many other species. And today, the placenta might hold the key to one of the most enduring mysteries in human medicine: Why do women suffer much higher rates of autoimmune disease than men do?

Updated at 12:07 p.m. on June 19, 2019

Like most other colleges across the country, Newbury College, a small, private liberal-arts school in Brookline, Massachusetts, held classes through the end of this past spring semester and then bid farewell to cap-and-gown-wearing seniors. But unlike almost every other college, those classes, and that farewell, were the school’s last: Newbury officially ceased operations at the end of May.

One of the first sources to publicly confirm the long-rumored closure was the president’s blog, where the news was shared last December. “It is with a heavy heart,” the school’s president, Joseph Chillo, wrote, “that I announce our intention to commence the closing of Newbury College, this institution we love so dearly.”

There’s a moment about 15 minutes into the first episode of Years and Years that made me gasp at its audacity, its prescience, its visual horror. The new six-part series from the British writer Russell T. Davies (Doctor Who, A Very English Scandal) charts the life of the Lyons family over the course of 15 years, starting in 2019 and ending in 2034. It’s a kitchen-sink saga that barrels its way through births and marriages and betrayals, but also through the near-future. In 2024, Stephen Lyons (played by Rory Kinnear), a financial adviser, is at home with his wife, Celeste (T’nia Miller), both rushing their way through the morning routine. When the camera turns to their teenage daughter Bethany (Lydia West), her face isn’t recognizably human. Instead, she looks like a 3-D version of a Snapchat puppy, with vast cartoon eyes, wagging pink ears, and a brown snout. When she talks, her voice is grotesquely distorted, a robotic hallucination of a child’s cadence. “I might have to start limiting filter time,” Celeste says in the same exasperated, noncommittal way that you might think, I really should spend less time on Twitter.



The premise of HBO’s Los Espookys sounds straightforward enough: The half-hour comedy follows a group of horror enthusiasts in an unnamed Latin American country who are hired to set up eerie scenarios—monster sightings, haunted houses, exorcisms, etc.—using their special effects and makeup skills. They’re a band of misfits attempting to fly their freak flags for a living.

But try to describe any specific aspect of the show created by the Saturday Night Live alum Fred Armisen and the comedians Julio Torres and Ana Fabrega, and things get weird. Take Andrés, the Espookys’ most inventive brainstormer. Played by Torres, Andrés is a character who sounds only a little strange at first: His hair is blue. (Cool.) He’s the adoptive heir to a chocolate fortune. (Sure.) He has a water demon living parasitically inside of him. (Wait, what?)

To hear Torres explain how he arrived at that plot point is to hear a writer-comedian sound like he’s playing a game of word association with himself. “Just the color blue … ” he began telling me over the phone, “just exploring that with, the hair is blue, and water is a big component, and then, okay, I guess he has a water demon inside of him? Like, that’s the next logical thing.” Fabrega, also on the call, laughs. “Just a natural fit!”

Then again, Los Espookys, which debuted last week and airs on HBO every Friday, is a show whose charms stem from its inexplicability. Blending magical realism with absurdist humor, the series tells a modest tale of four friends with a shared passion, but also comes across as an outlandish fever dream. Aside from a water demon, there’s also a cursed mirror and a seemingly possessed host of a news program devoted to sensational stories. “There were certain moments when we were writing where I truly felt, and I would tell Ana, ‘Okay, this is where HBO says, What the hell are you doing?’” Torres recalls. “That moment never came, to the point that I’m like, ‘Is it okay that no one stopped this? Like, have they seen it?’”

That high concept isn’t the only reason Los Espookys was a risky pitch. Most of the show’s characters speak Spanish, requiring English subtitles, and would be played by relative unknowns to an American audience. (Armisen plays a minor role.) In fact, Armisen had been hoping the series would land at HBO Latino when he met with the HBO programming chief Amy Gravitt, who oversees original comedies on the premium network. She didn’t see it that way, though. “The way I look at my slate, I like to balance out our larger, broader-appeal comedies with these specific comedic voices,” Gravitt told me. “When you go down the alternative path, you’re usually giving a voice to somebody who hasn’t had a shot before, so there’s something really exciting about that. You have a chance to experiment.” Los Espookys’ unconventionality, in other words, makes it worthwhile. And in its eccentric, concentrated package is a wealth of broader observations—on Latin American culture, on identity, on friendship.

Armisen built the skeleton of Los Espookys on his experiences in Mexico City. He based Renaldo (Bernardo Velasco), the group’s leader, on a prosthetics artist he met during a research trip there. (“He had long hair,” Armisen remembers. “I wanted the main guy to be this guy, a guy who’s into horror and is also proudly Mexican.”) He came up with Andrés’s adoptive family’s business after thinking of the booming chocolate industry in his mother’s native Venezuela. And he imbued the show, shot in Chile, with positivity: In Latin America, he pointed out, people aren’t unnerved by horror; they rejoice in it.

“When I was a kid, I lived in Brazil, and I just remember in their soap operas how death was a really big scene,” Armisen told me, adding that he’d originally wanted to name the show Mexico City (Only Good Things Happen). “Horror, death, and the celebration of it really just coexists there.”

While Armisen crafted the story, Torres and Fabrega defined the show’s offbeat humor. The pair, rising comic stars who met years ago in the New York stand-up scene, share a whimsical comedic sensibility—both ace deadpan delivery while also incorporating a quirky stage presence and sharp observational humor. Fabrega’s early stand-up sometimes involved dressing up in a costume and delivering her jokes at a snail’s pace, and during her time as a writer on The Chris Gethard Show, she’d perform goofy bits with a straight face. Torres, now a writer on SNL, has created some of the late-night show’s most high-concept digital shorts, usually involving a single joke—an overdesigned sink, the typeface used for the film Avatar—transformed into a meditation on existence. “Our solo work is so different, but the middle of our Venn diagram is so big,” Fabrega observes.

From them comes an earnestness within every joke and running gag on Los Espookys. Fabrega’s carefree character, Tati, takes on ever more odd jobs—breaking in strangers’ shoes, operating the second hand in a clock tower—but she’s so agreeable and takes them so seriously that it’s impossible to watch without thrilling in them, too. Úrsula (Cassandra Ciangherotti), Tati’s sister and the group’s practical-effects wizard, puts on a withdrawn air, but she never fails to support Tati’s goals. Overall, there’s a youthful energy to the foursome’s work: The flashy scenarios they put together for clients aren’t polished or all that professional; they’re scrappily assembled, and much of the joy of watching Los Espookys is in seeing how much mileage they can get out of some face paint and hastily glued-on prosthetics.

That said, Los Espookys isn’t afraid of incorporating a dash of real-world commentary. Andrés’s boyfriend, Juan Carlos (José Pablo Minor), is an avatar for Latin America’s ostensibly progressive upper-middle class—he’s queer, yes, but he also talks about preventing maids from voting. (“There’s still such a caste system in place,” Fabrega noted. “Through Juan Carlos, we address those things.”) Tati gets roped into a pyramid scheme run by a bloviating American businessman named Mark Stevens (John Early). And throughout the series, the vapid, bratty U.S. ambassador (Greta Titelman) tosses off one-liners about green cards and the border crisis, the show’s way of casually critiquing immigration law. “It always felt really funny and humanizing to be like, Andrés is at times clairvoyant, but he can’t go to America without a visa,” Torres said. “That’s what we felt was so drastic and funny, that, like, ‘Oh no, he can burst lightbulbs when he’s really angry, but he would be detained at the airport for having the wrong paperwork because he was born in the wrong country.’”

No, the show isn’t leaning hard into discussing bigger social issues—“It’s not like Season 2 will be all about ending gun violence,” Fabrega said—but sprinkling in some observations felt natural given its setting. “Little pieces like that [felt] like they would be fun to explore in such an absurdist landscape like this,” Torres explained. “It was very organic.”

Ultimately, Los Espookys achieves a unique comic alchemy: It’s empathetic yet critical, magical yet familiar, bizarre yet uncomplicated. Its title implies fright but also winks at the show’s droll tone. Still, for his part, Armisen has no idea how it got made. “If I knew what that ingredient was, I would just keep pitching,” he admitted. Gravitt, though, offered a simple explanation: “It’s just a good-natured group of characters that I hadn’t seen on television before.” Including that water demon.



This story contains minor spoilers for Always Be My Maybe.

Nahnatchka Khan didn’t intend to make her directorial film debut with the Netflix rom-com Always Be My Maybe. She’d been the showrunner of Fresh Off the Boat, the cheeky ABC sitcom about a Taiwanese American family living in ’90s Florida, for five seasons. She was ready to make the leap with a buddy comedy produced by Elizabeth Banks’s company for Lionsgate when turnover at the studio brought the film to a standstill and dashed her hopes. “It was a whole crazy thing,” Khan told me. “Suddenly Liz called and was like, ‘We’ve been put on hold,’ which eventually meant a bunch of movies were lost to the void.”

But Khan didn’t have to wait long for another opportunity to make her first movie. The actor Randall Park and the comedian Ali Wong had a script in need of a director—and Khan had been their first choice all along. “When [the Lionsgate film] went away, they went, ‘Heeeeey! What about oooour movie?’” Khan said in a singsongy voice to mimic her leads, who were out of earshot, in another room.

“As soon as she was available, we were like, ‘Start the engines,’” Park had told me earlier. Next to him, Wong nodded. “We snatched her,” she deadpanned.

Indeed, scoring Khan was a no-brainer for Park, who stars as the good-natured patriarch on Fresh Off the Boat, and for Wong, who had written for the show. Both have been on a hot streak in Hollywood—Park delivered memorable turns in blockbusters (Aquaman, Ant-Man and the Wasp) and TV comedies (Veep), while Wong broke out with a one-two punch of Netflix stand-up specials (Baby Cobra, Hard Knock Wife) and a supporting role on ABC’s American Housewife. For their first film together, which they’d co-written and produced with the screenwriter Michael Golamco, they needed someone behind the camera who understood their goals.

Though the film tells a classic tale of boy remeets girl—it follows a pair of childhood sweethearts, Marcus (Park) and Sasha (Wong), who reunite as adults after leading very different lives—Wong and Park didn’t just want to tell a love story; they wanted to tell a distinctly Asian American love story. They drew from their own upbringings, from their real-life friendship, and from two rom-com touchstones for inspiration: 1989’s When Harry Met Sally, which broke the genre’s format by delving into its leads’ contrasting lives, and 1992’s Boomerang, which depicted a predominantly black cast navigating love.

Khan proved the perfect match for the material. As the showrunner of Fresh Off the Boat—the first Asian American–centric sitcom to be syndicated—for five seasons, she deftly imbued the show with a tricky blend of cultural nuance and observational humor. With Always Be My Maybe, she achieves a celluloid sleight of hand: The film is a portrait of contemporary middle-class Asian America wrapped in a conventional, mainstream rom-com. Young Sasha makes herself some Spam musubi for dinner and watches Clarissa Explains It All while her parents work late at their convenience store. Marcus fronts a comedic rap group, just as Park once did. Adult Sasha and Marcus have significant others—a tracksuit-wearing playboy (Daniel Dae Kim) for her, a hippie with dreadlocks (Vivian Bang) for him—who aren’t defined by being Asian. “It’s such a cool, confident thing when you don’t explain the premise, you just have the premise,” Wong said. “It’s our reality, and we’re not going to take time to explain it.”

Khan grasped that reality. The Iranian American writer-director cut her teeth on TV comedies—she created Don’t Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 before launching Fresh Off the Boat—and paid careful attention to world-building. For a scene set at a birthday party, Khan was determined to open the sequence on two little girls running into the house and taking off their shoes—a small but significant cultural flourish. “I spent more time on that shot than I think a director would have if that wasn’t an important detail,” she admitted to me. “We had to get that timing right. You could get into [that scene] in any number of ways, but I liked showing that … It’s a part of this world.”

Even the film’s biggest set piece is a sly celebration of Asian American identity. Keanu Reeves swans into the film for a scene-stealing sequence in which he plays a heightened version of himself who competes with Marcus for Sasha’s affections and delivers nonsensical one-liners. (“The only stars that matter are the ones you see when you dream,” he purrs to Marcus’s girlfriend.) But Reeves wasn’t chosen just because he’s an A-lister with a popular franchise in the zeitgeist. “We thought, Who would be Marcus’s worst nightmare? It should be an Asian American icon who’s a great actor and who’s funny but also willing to make fun of himself,” Wong said. “[Keanu] was flattered that we remembered he was Asian American.”

While the gag had always been in the script, Khan enhanced its absurdity. “In our heads, it was, Keanu’s going to walk in, and that’s gonna be magical,” Park said, “but she took that and really made it dreamlike and surreal.” In Khan’s hands, time almost stops as Reeves enters (in a moment that’s already been GIFed to oblivion) and Marcus’s face falls in slow motion.

Then again, Khan knew how to deploy the celebrity-as-himself-but-worse trick. She’d used it on Don’t Trust the B---- in Apartment 23 with James Van Der Beek to hilarious effect: The joke played with the actor’s Dawson’s Creek legacy to comment astutely on celebrity. With Reeves, Khan does the same—and she didn’t stop there when it came to bringing her stamp to Always Be My Maybe. On set, she liked to cross-shoot, pointing cameras at both leads at the same time so they’d capture on-the-fly jokes as they came rather than resetting and re-creating them to complete the shot. And every night, Khan would mark up the next day’s shooting pages with alternative jokes and leave room for her stars to improv—a strategy she’d used while writing and directing TV episodes. “It frees you up as a writer to not have to craft the one perfect joke, and then you also have the improv capability,” she said. “Like, you have Ali and Randall. You have two racehorses. You’ve got to let them run!”

Together, they’ve created a film that challenges rom-com norms not by reinventing the genre wholesale, but by complementing its most timeless elements with the minute details of a world rarely seen on-screen. To Wong, Always Be My Maybe works not only because she, Park, and Khan know that world intimately, but also because they understand one another’s sensibilities. “With comedy, it’s so much about trust and communication,” Wong told me. “You don’t want to be on a comedy movie set and get into a screaming match with somebody because you don’t trust that what they’re suggesting is a good idea … [Randall and I] both have a huge amount of respect [for Nahnatchka], but also, we’re friends with her. Sometimes I panic when I think about, like, if I don’t have a project with her coming up.” Wong will just have to snatch her up for whatever comes next.



KINGSTON—Toward the end of August 2017, a 17-year-old Jamaican musician named Mikayla Simpson uploaded a video of herself singing to her Instagram account. In the short clip, she strummed her acoustic guitar and performed “Legend,” a record she’d written as a tribute to the country’s famed track star Usain Bolt. “Yuh nuh need no medal with a heart of gold, yuh stay humble inna yuh glory,” she sang about the Olympic champion. “If the times get slower and yuh start get old, mi still remember yuh story.”
Soon after, Bolt saw the video and reposted it to his own account, where it has since been viewed nearly 300,000 times by his several million followers. In the year and a half since recording that first video, Simpson, who sings under the stage name Koffee (sometimes Original Koffee), has been wholeheartedly embraced by some of Jamaica’s most famous musicians—and by their fan bases. At the January 2018 edition of the annual reggae festival Rebel Salute, the veteran artist Cocoa Tea introduced Koffee to a massive audience one month before her 18th birthday. Now 19, the DJ and singer-songwriter—or “singjay,” in island parlance—has already performed alongside contemporary icons such as Chronixx and Protoje.

When we spoke in Kingston’s Mountain View clearing late last month, a day before the release of her Rapture EP, Koffee marveled at the support she’s received from industry legends. “Being a young artist, you know that you’re not the first and there are a lot of people who have been there before you to basically look up to—people who have been setting examples forever,” she said. “They’re the foundation for the music that you are here experiencing and listening to now, [so] to know that you can … reach out to them and have them give you advice and just guide you along your journey, it’s a very comforting feeling.”

Raised in the Eltham View neighborhood of Spanish Town, about an hour outside Kingston, Koffee drew her first musical influences from the artists her Seventh-Day Adventist mother played in their home on Sundays. The musicians on rotation represented a diasporic melange—American R&B and soul singers such as Aretha Franklin and Etta James, as well as classic reggae artists including the Jamaican greats Beres Hammond, Dennis Brown, and, of course, Bob Marley.

Koffee taught herself to play guitar at age 12, after a friend let her borrow a spare, and began listening to modern reggae soon after. At 14, she made her first attempts to write within the genre. “I was listening to Protoje and Chronixx and dem flows and lyrics were very fascinating, and I was like, you know, feel like mi wan try this a little,” she recalled with a laugh. “And I just started playing around with lyrics, writing a few lines and trying to rhyme some words and getting bigger and bigger each time—so bigger words, more syllables, or longer rhyme schemes.”





During her final year at Ardenne High School in Kingston, Koffee auditioned for a talent show orchestrated by her music teacher. Though she’d never planned to pursue music full-time, the 17-year-old competed against a beatboxer and a few fellow singjays, and rocked a crowd that she estimated must have been nearly 1,000 people. “It was a huge moment for me,” she said of the competition. “And it basically gave me my first confidence in being able to perform and deliver music live.”

The Bolt tribute, and the resulting onslaught of attention, came a few months later. Among the viewers of Bolt’s Instagram repost, for example, were representatives of the Jamaica-based label Upsetta Records, who asked Koffee to join reggae veterans such as Busy Signal and Jah Vinci in singing on Ouji Riddim, a collaborative record on which each singer recorded their vocals over the same production, or “riddim.” Her contribution, the October 2017 hit “Burning,” showcased a young artist whose vocal dexterity could handle flows beyond the stripped-down acoustics of “Legend.”

At turns solemn and celebratory, “Burning” keenly reflects Koffee’s interest in producing music that speaks to the concerns and triumphs of Jamaicans. The record is personal—she wrote the song after failing to gain entry into sixth form, or a precollege program of sorts, but her anxieties about education reflect broader patterns among the country’s youth. Even so, the lyrics are resolutely hopeful. “Neva be ungrateful / Life is such a teacha,” she sings of the disappointment she felt upon learning of her results and the determination that kept her going. In this, she draws from the genre’s most iconic bards, whose music soundtracked moments of inner turmoil and political strife alike.
For Koffee, the stakes of her own trajectory remain high well after the setback that inspired the track. “I think it’s good to have a positive influence on youth sometimes. That’s wavy,” she said of her mission to push through the grit that characterizes Jamaica’s contemporary musical scene. The singer knows that teenagers aren’t listening to the kinds of artists they associate with their parents, but she wants to channel the social consciousness of legends such as Bob Marley with a fresh twist. “I try to modernize positivity very distinctly,” she added. With its infectious melody and bouncy spirit, “Burning” is also the record that piqued the interest of Major Lazer’s Walshy Fire, who would later co-produce her debut single, “Toast,” with the Jamaican sound engineer Izybeats.

The day after Koffee and I spoke in Kingston, I was in Tracks & Records, the Bolt-owned café across the island, in Montego Bay, when “Toast” started playing over the sound system. The air in the establishment shifted, and everyone present—tourists, local diners, and restaurant employees alike—seemed to pause for a moment to smile, or to sway. Along with the impossibly catchy Izybeats and Walshy Fire backing, the sunniness of Koffee’s chorus is hard to ignore: “Blessings all pon mi life and / Mi thank God fi di journey, di earnings a jus fi di plus (Yeah) / Gratitude is a must (Yeah).”
Those who’ve seen the recent Jordan Peele thriller Us might recognize “Toast” as one of the songs that the teenager Zora (played by Shahadi Wright Joseph) listens to through her earbuds while ignoring the rest of her family. It’s the lead single for Koffee’s EP Rapture and the first song that captured the attention of American audiences.

Rapture is a tightly constructed 15-minute run; it’s a jolt of high energy and sharp songwriting. In culling the tracks for the record, Koffee drew from her own experiences as well as a deep love of her country and its musical legacy. “This is what I know—Jamaica. No matter where I go, how long I stay there … here is always home for me,” she said. “It’s like a paradise, I think, for somebody who was raised in Jamaica, especially ‘cause we get [to] see, like, the ins and outs and the day-to-day goings. Everything that I see around me in Jamaica comes out in my music.”

Rapture’s title track, the singer’s personal favorite on her EP, opens the record with a memorable first line: “Koffee come in like a rapture.” The 5-foot emcee mocks those who assert that her height will keep her from making a big impact (the dismissal is particularly sharp given the extent to which music, and especially reggae, is a male-dominated industry). On “Rapture,” Koffee “kill dem wid verbs and wid di pronouns”; she reminds listeners that this is her show. A different track, “Throne,” sees her noting that she’s “inna mi zone, alto to baritone,” a boast of impressive range.

Though she also listens to a number of American hip-hop artists, such as 21 Savage and Travis Scott, Koffee stays true to her national—and musical—roots on Rapture. On “Raggamuffin,” the EP’s final track, Koffee makes the case for both her own longevity and her genre’s. “Raggamuffin reggae beat yeh / Dancehall pan di street yeh,” she sings, “Caan stall nor defeat, 2030, we still a dweet.” Her delivery is at once jablike and inspiring, reflective of the track’s cheekily confident lyrics and the broader legacy it evokes: The song takes its name from a reggae subgenre, the name of which is itself a reclaimed word that British colonizers used to designate black islanders. It’s that same irreverent ingenuity that makes Koffee’s music so exciting. As she put it, “The way I deliver is strictly Jamaican.”



Too often, a biographical drama about the life of a famous author boils down to a rote depiction of literary influences. John Ronald Reuel Tolkien’s life story is perfectly fascinating in its own right: Orphaned at the age of 12, he grew up a star scholarship student with a passion for linguistics, fought in World War I (including the historically bloody Battle of the Somme), and survived to become a noted academic. But Tolkien, Dome Karukoski’s new film about the writer’s young life, exists only because Tolkien would go on to create the world of The Lord of the Rings. Thus its entire narrative purpose is to check off every detail in the budding author’s life that had some bearing on his work.

The film does all this to the exclusion of the work itself. Presumably because the act of sitting down and putting pen to paper is not that visually dynamic, Tolkien, which stars Nicholas Hoult in the title role, cuts off the action right before he starts work on his great novels. Instead, it devotes 111 minutes of molasses-slow storytelling to his youth, his war service, his romance with wife Edith Bratt (played by Lily Collins), and his bond with three school chums that was so close, one might even call it … a fellowship. Which Hoult, as Tolkien, does, practically right into the camera. This is a biopic so fearful that audiences won’t get the connections it’s drawing that it depicts a CGI dragon stalking the battlefields of the Somme. The result doesn’t rise above the insight of a Wikipedia page.

Tolkien was raised in austere times, and he grew up in particularly strained circumstances because his mother, Mabel, died abruptly of diabetes at the age of 34 (his father died years earlier). Brought up in a strict religious environment by his mother’s friend Francis Morgan (Colm Meaney), a stern Catholic priest, Tolkien threw himself into his studies, showing particular aptitude for the classics, Old English, and creating his own fictional languages. Edith was another boarder at the foster home where he grew up; his best pals were schoolmates who would gather with him to drink tea, discuss poetry, and generally jape around as harmlessly as possible. Karukoski’s film cuts between these episodes from Tolkien’s younger days and his service in the Somme, where he searches for his friend Geoffrey (Anthony Boyle) on the battlefield with a helpful friend named Sam (Craig Roberts) in tow. Yes, Sam. Did you get it? Don’t worry—the film makes sure you will.

If you’re not looking for much more than a relaxing couple of hours in the theater, Tolkien isn’t a bad bet; it mostly sustains an extremely sleepy mood. Unlike his other author performance, in the horrendous J. D. Salinger biopic Rebel in the Rye, Hoult is not straining to make Tolkien appear as a groundbreaking nonconformist destined to change culture forever. The naughtiest thing Tolkien does in the film is sneak backstage for an opera performance; the most popular beverage being swigged for most of the movie is tea. Karukoski, a Finnish director who made a small splash in 2017 with another biopic, called Tom of Finland (about a far more transgressive historical figure), shoots this part of Tolkien’s life with a sun-kissed, autumnal hue, giving each flashback a nostalgic haze that only slows down the action even more.

Every major moment in the movie reads as lazy box-checking. Besides the visions of dragons, a trip to see a Wagner opera (the composer’s Ring cycle was a major influence on The Lord of the Rings), and the mention of a great “fellowship” between Tolkien and his chums, there’s an extended sequence in which Tolkien and Edith discuss his love of the phrase cellar door, a linguistic flourish that Tolkien famously proclaimed was one of the most beautiful in the English language. Though Tolkien likely did not invent scholarly affection for the phrase, the film shoehorns it in anyway, trying to leave the most obvious possible trail of crumbs to the author’s beloved canon. The war material pulls no punches; the Somme was a cruel, horrifying moment in world history, and Karukoski depicts it bluntly. But everything that happens seems irritatingly in service of a punch line—the creation of The Lord of the Rings—that never comes.

Most baffling of all, the film overlooks the fascinating details of Tolkien’s later life—his comradeship with C. S. Lewis, his years teaching at Oxford University—in favor of bonds between Tolkien and his teenage friends that aren’t fully developed or deeply examined in the script. Karukoski might have told a powerful story about the legacy of World War I and the havoc it wreaked on a generation, killing young soldiers in the millions (indeed, Tolkien told that story himself, obliquely and thrillingly, through his novels). Or he might have taken a more sweeping epic scope befitting his subject. Instead, Tolkien does nothing more than lay out the basics of its hero’s life. It feels like a wasted opportunity.



This post contains mild spoilers for What the Constitution Means to Me.

At the start of the Tony-nominated play What the Constitution Means to Me, the writer and performer Heidi Schreck bounds cheerfully onto the stage wearing a sunny smile and a cupcake-yellow blazer. She then proceeds to savage the revered, 232-year-old text on which the U.S. was built. The play is never more electrifying than when Schreck’s charisma curdles into fury over how the entire American legal framework has rendered women’s lives worthless.

As a teenager growing up in small-town Wenatchee, Washington, Schreck earned college money by giving speeches about the Constitution at American Legion halls around the country, in front of crowds of approving veterans. What the Constitution Means to Me begins as a re-creation of one such competition, the set a replica of an American Legion hall, complete with drab maroon carpeting and a humorless Legionnaire moderator who keeps time. Schreck plays her younger self, a horny, “psychotically polite” teenager who has intense feelings for both Patrick Swayze and the Constitution. Fifteen-year-old Heidi is in love with the document’s expansiveness, and its miraculous ability to reflect the nation’s changing values and aspirations.

But Schreck, as her adult self, has developed deep reservations about how the supreme laws of the land were engineered, with ample protections for landowning white men, but little regard for anyone else. She constantly steps outside of her younger character to interject. Her teenage optimism now faded, Schreck traces the ways in which the Constitution has failed generations of women, including those in her family.

The play builds toward a revelation about Schreck’s grandmother, who was powerless to protect her family from her second husband, a horrific abuser who repeatedly raped one of her daughters until Heidi’s own mother, at 14, testified against him in court. Schreck highlights the government’s approach to cases like these: In 2005, the Supreme Court ruled that the police department of Castle Rock, Colorado, had no obligation to enforce a protective order for Jessica Lenahan against her estranged ex-husband, who ultimately murdered their three young daughters.

It’s provocative, dark material that Schreck cuts with humor and wit. In what is largely a zigzagging one-woman show that combines memoir and legal analysis, she deftly builds a we’re-all-in-this-together intimacy with the audience. At both performances I attended, folks cheered at mentions of reproductive choice and marriage equality. They loved the obligatory recording of Ruth Bader Ginsburg that makes the case for nine women on the Supreme Court. In one of the play’s many digressions, Schreck mentions the post-Soviet Russian economy. They applauded uproariously when she cuts herself off and says that that’s another play entirely—a #resistance-friendly reference. It makes sense that Hillary Clinton is a fan.

I understand the impulse for camaraderie, but the chumminess ultimately felt like the greatest failing of an otherwise unflinching work. It’s impossible to talk about whom the Constitution has stripped the full benefits of citizenship from without addressing how this systematic mistreatment has fallen along starkly racial lines. Schreck nods at this fact throughout but shies away from naming it directly. White women, after all, have had a hand throughout history in supporting and defending misogynistic and racist politicians and policies, and have helped ensure that the scant rights parceled out are not also extended to all women. She mentions the recent Alabama law that criminalized abortion in the state without noting that it was the female Republican governor, Kay Ivey, who enthusiastically signed it.

In fact, the kinds of people whom the American legal system has been the most effective at safeguarding are a lot like those who were in the room at the Helen Hayes Theater: mostly rich, mostly white, many gray-haired. I wanted Schreck to ask this gathering to examine the ways in which their own lives have been advantaged by our comically lopsided justice system, the authority that instinctively sides with them, the schools they send their children to, the wealth they’ve accumulated, and whether they would be truly willing to give up those spoils for the prosperity of others.

Instead, Schreck opts for something far less confrontational. The play concludes with her facing off against a real-life competitive teenage debater about whether to abolish the Constitution, their positions determined by a coin toss. On both nights I saw the performance, Thursday Williams, a black high-school senior and an aspiring lawyer, was tasked with arguing in favor of preserving the decrepit national albatross. And so it was in her voice that the audience heard it would be far too risky to scrap what is known in favor of what is unknown; that the only way out was to vote, protest, and run for office, even when progress seems slow and excruciatingly uneven. The crowd loved it. For a work with a premise that felt revolutionary, that prescription was a letdown. The political realities of our country are merciless. Art, at least, should be the place to reach for something more imaginative.

An audience member is chosen every night to pick the winner of the debate. Twice, a woman elected to keep the Constitution.



It was only a matter of time before the Toy Story franchise started asking questions about the very nature of consciousness. It’s a direction I wish more long-running brands would take in their later sequels. Once you’ve completed at least one trilogy’s worth of stories, your next movie should try to dig into the notion of sentience. Toy Story 4, the latest entry in Pixar’s greatest series, on paper seems like a superfluous endeavor. After all, the first three films told a fairly complete story about the life cycle of a toy, following the felt cowboy Woody (voiced by Tom Hanks) as he lived a whole childhood with his owner, Andy, and then moved on to a new kid named Bonnie.

Toy Story 4 wisely feels like less of a new chapter and more like an epilogue, an addendum for Woody that muses on the peculiarities of the symbiotic relationship between toys and humans these movies have long explored. But the film’s most challenging, bizarre, and lovable material involves a beady-eyed Frankenstein’s monster named Forky (Tony Hale) who becomes the newest addition to Bonnie’s flock after she builds him in kindergarten class. His body is a plastic spork, his feet are made of broken popsicle sticks, and his hands are gnarled pipe cleaners that grasp at the air with maniacal urgency. Most important, he doesn’t know why he’s alive, and reader, that’s when I leaned forward in my seat.

The cute concept of the original 1995 Toy Story, the first ever Pixar feature, is the stuff of many a kid’s childhood fantasy. What if, when you exited the room, your toys came alive and had their own rich thoughts and feelings? The first film followed a rivalry between Woody and Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen), Andy’s new favorite, and the sequels were both concerned with the toys’ fears of mortality and aging, reflected in Andy growing up and Woody worrying he’d lack a purpose if he wasn’t played with. At the end of Toy Story 3, the departure of Andy was a tear-jerking goodbye, but the arrival of Bonnie suggested the fun could last forever.

While that could have been the end for the franchise, Toy Story 3 made $1 billion at the worldwide box office, and so here we are. Luckily, Toy Story 4 (written by Andrew Stanton and Stephany Folsom and directed by Josh Cooley in his filmmaking debut) has some very heady things in mind. Sure, the fun can last forever for Woody, but that’s because he’s functionally immortal—as long as nothing ever rips his stuffing out, he can exist eternally, thanks to whatever toy magic is powering him. More than anything, the film is about him arriving at new insights about this immortality as he reflects on the creation of Forky, a plastic creature who can think and speak simply because his creator (a kindergartener) pasted him together in class.

That’s not to suggest that most of Toy Story 4 involves Woody and his pals sitting around their bedroom and debating the writings of Descartes. The plot is, as usual for these films, an extended action caper, set mostly at an amusement park that Bonnie’s family is visiting on vacation. But the adventure is spurred into motion by Forky jumping out of a car window because he knows that he’s a creature made of trash and thinks he deserves to die. At multiple points, Woody and Buzz discuss their own “inner voices” (their consciences) and how those drive them to make selfless decisions, like rescuing an existentially compromised living spork. Toy Story 4 can have all the fun it wants, and it does, but it also throws these deeper concepts around with abandon.

Woody’s mission to rescue Forky involves convincing the little fella that toyhood is a noble calling, and that the joy he brings Bonnie is enough reason to keep on living. That’s the essential concept that drove all the other Toy Story films—the powerful, nostalgic bond between a child and their most beloved possessions. But as Woody explores the amusement park and its environs, he rediscovers Bo Peep (Annie Potts), one of Andy’s old toys, who was given away years ago and was absent in Toy Story 3. She’s now leading an independent life free of her owner, along with a motley crew of new characters like the Canadian action figure Duke Caboom (a masterfully dry Keanu Reeves) and the wisecracking plush animals Ducky (Keegan-Michael Key) and Bunny (Jordan Peele).

Cooley and his writers have clearly decided that, if the Toy Story narrative is just going to drag on and on, they might as well try and answer every question one might propose about these everlasting creatures. Can toys live on their own? What separates a toy from an inanimate object? Can a toy choose its own kid to play with? Is Woody’s existence, in a happy home with a comfortable family, an unusually privileged one? And can toys themselves start to grow up, even become parents, as Woody does to Forky (in a manner of speaking)? Toy Story 4 fits these ideas into a rip-roaring, 100-minute running time, polished with the usual Pixar sheen. I’m all for the studio exploring new concepts and original characters going forward, and setting aside the endless anthologizing of its biggest hits for a good long while. But if I had to get another Toy Story, this is about as strange and beguiling an entry as I could have hoped for.



Metta World Peace, formerly known as Ron Artest, is one of those people whose name never evokes a middle-of-the-road reaction. The ex-NBA player, who won a championship with the Los Angeles Lakers in 2010 and gained notoriety for his role in the infamous “Malice at the Palace” brawl in 2004, might be described as “crazy” or “angry” or “tough.”

But another way to describe him might be “brutally honest,” whether it’s about his mental-health struggles that began in his youth (he thanked his psychiatrist on national television immediately after the Lakers captured the NBA title) or admitting that he applied for a job at an electronics store his rookie season because he wanted a discount. World Peace has always shown the world a surprising sort of candor.

This honesty—which made him one of the most fascinating players to ever wear an NBA uniform—is evident in the new Showtime documentary Quiet Storm: The Ron Artest Story (directed and produced by the former ESPN feature producer Johnny Sweet). The film is a worthy vessel for the athlete’s turbulent journey, depicting its subject’s efforts—publicly and privately—to change his once-toxic reputation. Despite his forthright nature, World Peace told me recently when he appeared on my podcast, Jemele Hill Is Unbothered, that he was reluctant to participate in a documentary about his life: “I try to be behind the scenes.”

Quiet Storm, of course, gives adequate time to the brawl for which he’s still best known. As a member of the Indiana Pacers, World Peace delivered an unnecessary hard foul to the Detroit Pistons’ Ben Wallace with under a minute left in the game, and the two got into a heated confrontation. A spectator threw a drink on World Peace, who went charging into the stands wildly swinging punches. A full-on melee developed: Nine players were suspended, with World Peace receiving an 86-game suspension—still the longest in NBA history for a non-drug-related offense—and a $5 million fine.

The brawl, arguably the most embarrassing moment in league history, became powerful evidence for those who had long labeled the NBA a thug league, and for those who, because of his lengthy history of suspensions and on-court run-ins, considered World Peace to be a danger. The racial undertones were difficult to miss: The imagery of black players attacking white fans served as a kind of racial pornography that had many openly opining about the NBA’s ruin.
(The lingering hostility between fans and NBA players was explored in an ESPN The Magazine poll four years later: Respondents believed the typical NBA player was less likely than players from the other three major leagues to respect the fans, remain loyal to his team, or love his wife, and more likely to carry a gun, use recreational drugs, or have an entourage.)

Quiet Storm provides a panoramic view of the brawl. As shocking as the incident was when it happened, in 2004, it seems equally surreal 15 years later. The film offers a real sense of how terrified World Peace and his teammates were as cameras follow them from the on-court, in-the-stands fighting to their locker room. Viewers will cringe while watching the Pacers make their way off the court as fans hurl bottles, and even a chair, at them.

The documentary also conveys the totality of the collateral damage. “I watched it and it’s like, Oh boy, I gotta relive these moments,” World Peace told me, referring to his reluctance to even do the film. “The people I was affecting, we never sat down together, so we never actually experienced those moments together. I never knew how they felt. They didn’t know how I was feeling. On a TV screen, you get a chance to see everything.” In Quiet Storm, the former Pacer Jermaine O’Neal’s interview stands out because of the lingering animosity he still appears to harbor toward World Peace. Another highlight is an interview with John Green, the fan who threw the drink. Green, who’s had his own personal demons to deal with, apparently developed a relationship with World Peace after the athlete called him years later and asked him to lunch.

Though it does a deep dive on the Palace fight and the ensuing consequences, the film makes clear that the brawl was a culmination of years of trauma World Peace had experienced, starting with his troubled upbringing in the Queensbridge housing projects in New York. World Peace often witnessed his mother and father physically fighting. As he notes on-screen, he internalized that violence and learned at an early age that the only way to survive and be respected was to fight. He also discusses his 2007 arrest on domestic-violence charges (to which he pleaded no contest) and the help he received from therapy afterward.

The documentary’s main message, in all this, is about growth. World Peace, once considered an enemy of the league, won the NBA’s prestigious J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award seven years after the Palace fight. He auctioned his NBA championship ring and raised $650,000 for mental-health charities. Part of the reason the NBA forward Kevin Love can go public about experiencing a panic attack, and why the league has a mental-health wellness program, is because World Peace began discussing the issue openly years ago.

Quiet Storm rightly positions World Peace’s journey as uplifting, despite the ugliness that he was subjected to in his childhood, and despite the ugly incidents he instigated in both his professional and personal life. In resisting the urge to make the Palace fight its centerpiece, the film gives World Peace, however reluctant, the space to tell a fuller story.



Chernobyl, which wrapped up its five-episode run on HBO last week, is one of the more unlikely hits of 2019—a bleak, panicky, emetic drama about a nuclear disaster whose defining stylistic qualities were British accents, a fanatical commitment to historical detail, and a score that sounded like two pieces of metal being scraped together. And yet: I loved it. Lots of other people did, too, so much so that it’s currently the highest-rated drama on IMDb of all time. Chernobyl was urgent. It was the kind of show whose stakes were so high that a two-degree helicopter detour could mean death. It was allegorical. And, best of all, the whole thing concluded in less than six hours.

It probably hasn’t escaped your notice that television episodes are getting longer. The paradox of living in this specific cultural moment is that people have less free time than ever and infinitely more things to watch—and yet the powers that be have been compelled to stretch many of those shows into packages that rival, in their running time, the audiobook of Moby Dick. Single installments in dramatic series run 70, 80, even 90 minutes long. Mid-season streaming episodes in which not a single dynamic thing happens reliably last an entire hour. Even existing shows returning for contemporary continuations or reboots are getting drawn out into formats that simply don’t do them favors. PBS’s 1993 miniseries based on Armistead Maupin’s Tales of the City clocked in at six episodes; the new Netflix update runs to 10. The Twilight Zone, that paragon of cogent speculative storytelling, has been stretched out into a flabby, hour-long format by CBS All Access.

What’s also noteworthy, though, is that the best TV shows of recent months are the ones embracing restraint. Netflix’s Russian Doll; Amazon’s Fleabag, Homecoming, and Catastrophe; Hulu’s PEN15 and Shrill; IFC’s Documentary Now!; and FX’s Better Things all craft entire seasons that can be watched in less than six hours. The stories they tell are not only ambitious and evocative, but also concisely rendered. The first episode of Season 2 of Fleabag functions as a one-act play on its own, as does the Marina Abramović pastiche in Documentary Now! starring Cate Blanchett. They’re carefully structured and intentionally taut. And they reward viewers who enjoy engaging mindfully with shows, rather than listening to them with one ear while idly scrolling through Instagram.

The scourge of overlong television episodes—as has been thoughtfully documented by Kathryn VanArendonk at Vulture—is a reaction to the rise of prestige television. On premium cable, where shows can fill a whole hour without ads, the 55-minute episode used to be a hallmark of series such as The Sopranos and The Wire. And over time, length came to be correlated with quality, and with TV auteurs who declined to have their genius constrained by such arbitrary forces as “formats” or “editors.” It’s a gendered phenomenon that VanArendonk called “the manspreading of TV,” where creators demand the same time privileges as other prestige dramas, and so episodes creep further and further beyond the boundaries of the 60-minute mark. Overlong episodes have come to be associated with quality, but also with power. All eight episodes of Matthew Weiner’s recent Amazon series The Romanoffs ran between 63 and 90 minutes. Four out of the six final episodes of Game of Thrones ran at least 75 minutes long—not because they needed to, but because who, at HBO, could say no?

The trend plays out slightly differently on streaming television, where series feel like they’re running long for no reason other than that they can. At this point in life, I’m habituated to the inevitability that the most impotent mid-season episodes of a Netflix drama will also be the ones that are 57 minutes long. Netflix seems, thankfully, to have moved away from the 13-episode standard of its Marvel superhero shows, series that padded out TV episodes as if they were mountaineers dressing for Everest. All too often, though, success means extension, like The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel being bumped from eight episodes to 10, or The Handmaid’s Tale from 10 to 13, a creative decision that’s only further exposed how challenging the Hulu series finds plotting.

The phenomenon of stretched-out television is frustrating because, among other things, it isn’t necessary. It’s cheaper to make shows with fewer episodes, and it doesn’t mean viewers will enjoy them any less. Gentleman Jack, HBO’s co-production with the BBC about the architect of Britain’s first lesbian marriage, could have been an exceptional costume drama in the standard three- or four-episode miniseries template; drawn out across eight hours, it struggled to find things for its heroine to do. Amazon’s Hanna, based on a movie that told almost the exact same story in two hours, sagged more heavily in the middle than an overloaded washing line. That’s not to say that the eight-episode drama can’t be well crafted. HBO’s Big Little Lies, told across seven installments that usually run about 50 minutes, is a masterpiece of pacing that somehow does justice to its sprawling cast of characters within tight time frames.

Shorter series don’t just represent less of a time commitment. For creators, they mean having to agonize over which scenes matter most, which lines are most crucial for plot and character development. The end result, pruned into its most succinct form, is loaded with intention. As viewers, we don’t need to see and understand everything. Shows that feel fragmented like Atlanta and Better Things, that let us read between the vignettes and scenes we do get to see, can feel bracing. Equally, series such as Fleabag and Russian Doll, which craft scenes around specific purposes and use flashbacks to fill in the rest, show how much can be done within a short space. The result is that they’re redefining what quality looks like on television: Of Vulture’s ongoing list of the best TV shows of 2019, 16 out of 22 on the list run under six hours in total per season. May producers and showrunners only pay attention.



Uh Oh, Look Who Got Wet (2019), Janiva Ellis’s contribution to the latest biennial exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art, is a painting of a border: fence, river, palm trees, storm on the horizon, and figures making their treacherous way across. The landscape—something of a departure for Ellis, who often paints surrealist portraits—captures a woman, partially dressed, carrying a child as she wades through the stream at a break in the fence. With a third hand, the woman is peeling back the skin from her face, revealing an expression that falls somewhere between fatigue and resolve. The child she bears is an animal, a bizarro canine creature. Another woman lies stretched out on the riverbank, possibly dead. Her lower half is a messy red pattern that could be a tie-dyed skirt—or maybe her intestines, strewn over the shore.

Where Ellis’s mother figure is running, or what she’s fleeing, remains unseen. But the tension is apparent in her face and posture, and in the fact that she is in this moment crossing, or trespassing, the boundary marked by the fence. Such precariousness is also a theme of this year’s show, which explores an America that is, like the woman on the border, suspended between exhaustion and determination. The 2019 Whitney Biennial—which comprises the work of 75 artists and collectives, the majority of whom are nonwhite, half of whom identify as women, and three-quarters of whom are under 40 years old—is a steadfast survey of anxiety and identity. It is a quiet show, compared with recent editions. And it arrives at a difficult time for the Whitney program, especially after the 2017 biennial was marked by protests over a portrait of the body of Emmett Till by a white artist, Dana Schutz. But the latest biennial finds balance in a cogent and underutilized curatorial strategy: First, assemble a group of American artists that comes close to actually resembling what America looks like today.

The choice to center women and artists of color in this year’s Whitney Biennial, curated by Rujeko Hockley and Jane Panetta, is abundantly apparent in figurative artworks. One of the first pieces to greet viewers leaving the elevator of the Whitney’s still-new building in New York City’s Meatpacking District is Kota Ezawa’s National Anthem (2018), an animated projection that shows the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick and other NFL players taking the knee as “The Star-Spangled Banner” plays. Elsewhere, a wall-sized mural by Pat Phillips depicts two black hands as they reach down from the ceiling and tack up a Gadsden flag. Phillips’s mural, which appears behind a wooden fence (another border), also features a pistol, bullets, and a riot-control canister. The “Don’t Tread on Me” flag dangles from one corner, an incomplete gesture that hints at the irony of a black man objecting to state violence using a symbol whose meaning has drifted toward white nationalism.

Abstractions on view underscore the political consciousness laced throughout the biennial, too, including Eric N. Mack’s Proposition: for wet Gee’s Bend Quilts to replace the American flag—Permanently (2019). The title of this installation of fabric patches suspended from the wall and ceiling refers to works by the famous black quilters of Gee’s Bend, Alabama. Very much unlike those exquisite quilts, Mack’s piece is in tatters, a choice that points to the untenable concept of a single America. Nicholas Galanin, a Tlingit and Unangax̂ artist, offers a critique of white monoculture through indigenous craft in White Noise, American Prayer Rug (2018), a woven textile that depicts the abstract static flicker of a television set. Bronze and ceramic sculptures rooted in West African forms by Simone Leigh and garmentlike pieces with Native American and minimalist influences by Jeffrey Gibson also tease out the tension between traditional craft and contemporary aesthetics.

The shining moments in this Whitney Biennial come in works that truly marry formal anxieties with lived experience. Steffani Jemison’s spellbinding Sensus Plenior (2017) is one such piece. The documentarylike video begins with a sequence that follows Susan Webb, an ordained minister who leads Harlem’s Master Mime Ministry, as she applies her white face paint. But Jemison has supplanted the conversation with a brutalist noise-jazz composition (performed on a violin and double bass). When Webb begins preaching—through a mime performance choreographed to the song “Anointing,” by the gospel artist J. Moss—Jemison runs the footage straight at first. But she gradually slows down the video’s frame rate, drawing out the ecstasy of Webb’s exhortation to the point of agony for the viewer. Watching it is a distressing experience: In Jemison’s stark depiction of the Reverend Webb, the line between homage and warning blurs; the piece reads in some ways as a demonstration of how black art forms are co-opted.

There are missteps in the show, for sure. Charcoal drawings by Christine Sun Kim, a deaf artist, feature charts that measure her frustration with institutions that cater only to the hearing. (In Degrees of My Deaf Rage in the Art World (2018), one such frustration, “visiting artists who aren’t comfortable with interpreters,” rates as “obtuse rage.”) These are memes, really—and a missed opportunity to showcase Kim’s work, since she is known for engaging sound performances that examine the links between sign language and music. Agustina Woodgate’s National Times (2016/2019)—an installation of clocks outfitted with sandpaper arms that slowly grind away the numbers—is simply didactic.

But there are no outright mistakes in this biennial—nothing like the divisive abstraction in the 2017 show by Schutz that depicted the 1955 funeral photograph of a mutilated Till. That painting sparked protests that forced museum leaders to reckon with issues of cultural appropriation and representation. (One artist, Parker Bright, obstructed Schutz’s painting while wearing a shirt that read Black Death Spectacle.) This time around, outrage has focused not on the content of the biennial, but on the institution itself. Michael Rakowitz, an Iraqi American artist, dropped out in protest over the Whitney’s relationship with Warren Kanders, a vice chair of the museum’s board, who owns a weapons-manufacturing company. In a twist, Kanders is also the subject of a protest piece included in the Whitney Biennial: Triple-Chaser (2019), an 11-minute documentary by a group called Forensic Architecture that details the use of tear gas produced by Kanders’s company.

Crucially, very little Donald Trump is on view. By my count, the president’s name comes up just once, in a sound installation by Marcus Fischer recorded the day before the president’s inauguration. The omission might seem unlikely for a show that is in many ways clearly attuned to America’s political dynamics. For comparison, at the height of the Iraq War, the 2006 Whitney Biennial included a painting by Richard Serra called Stop Bush (2004), featuring those words over the notorious silhouetted image of the hooded prisoner at Abu Ghraib. This year’s exhibit includes no such call to arms.

Flash points around race and identity didn’t start with Trump, the curators could be signaling, and they won’t end when he leaves office. Maybe the broader point is that the polarizing president just isn’t a factor here. This Whitney Biennial is a subtle show built on a whole host of themes, no single one of which represents America. But the exhibit is, for once, representative. That choice might be obvious, but it’s striking—and something museums should adopt as the norm.



As details of the subscription services planned by each of America’s corporate-media powerhouses have trickled out, something has become clear: The past decade or so of online-streaming television was the medium’s wild-west era, a time when you could watch thousands of hours of content from every major studio for a fraction of the cost of cable. Between Netflix and Hulu, subscribers could watch most first-run movies and TV episodes on their computer for less than $20 a month. Throw in HBO at $15 more, and you basically had the complete package. And it was okay if you had to wait a little while to see everything, since the concept of the “water cooler” show that everyone watched at the same time had all but vanished.

With the advent of Disney+, Apple TV+, and a new service now being mulled by the AT&T-owned WarnerMedia, the cowboy days of streaming media are over. It’s why Netflix has spent the past few years investing in original content to fill up its carousels; why Disney has bought out almost every network that had an initial investment in Hulu; and why WarnerMedia is planning to leverage the might of its HBO brand to launch an umbrella app that will take advantage of the conglomerate’s entire archive. The siloed age of television has arrived, a time when people will be paying six or seven different monthly fees, if not more, to keep abreast of pop culture—and the cost will end up approximating the hefty cable bill that every cord cutter has sought to avoid.

WarnerMedia, which was created after AT&T’s purchase of Time Warner in February, is a juggernaut rivaling the likes of Netflix and Disney. The company owns the Warner Bros. movie library as well as the deep Turner Classic Movies archive, the premium-cable channels HBO and Cinemax, and the many Turner Broadcasting channels, such as TBS, TNT, CNN, TruTV, and Cartoon Network/Adult Swim. According to a Wall Street Journal report last week, the WarnerMedia chief executive John Stankey is planning to launch an online platform that brings all of that together for $16 to $17 a month, which is just a little more than an HBO Now subscription costs.

If WarnerMedia’s service launches as planned in early 2020 (WSJ pegged next March as the proposed date), it’ll come months after Disney+, which will tap into that company’s library of classic animated films, Pixar projects, Marvel shows and movies, and the Star Wars universe. Disney also now has full control of Hulu and just completed an acquisition of Fox, an almost century-old studio whose archives will help fill either streaming service. The company’s ultimate plan is to bundle Disney+ (priced at $7 a month) with Hulu and ESPN+ as a package deal. Meanwhile, tech giants including Netflix, Amazon, and Apple are spending huge sums producing enough original content to keep pace.

This ongoing arms race means there’s more original television to consume than ever before, but it also means the financial burden on consumers will continue to grow. Even as people cancel their cable subscription to save money, the streaming era will offer more of the large-scale bundling of channels that made cable television what it was, attracting viewers with marquee items such as sports or movies but making them pay for the whole media package. WarnerMedia+ (or whatever name it ends up getting) will use HBO to bait viewers into subscribing at higher prices for everything else.

That plan was spurred into action by Netflix, which spooked executives such as Stankey into thinking the only way to compete with the company was to churn out TV at a similar rate. Last year, Stankey lectured HBO employees on the company’s failings, despite its generally excellent track record for producing high-quality, award-winning shows that yield billion-dollar profits. “I want more hours of engagement,” Stankey told them. Several months later, the HBO CEO Richard Plepler stepped down.

But Netflix’s staggering spending on original content came as the company realized that many of its most popular offerings—shows such as The Office that were licensed from other companies—would become more expensive as studios began to learn the value of streaming media. In December, Netflix paid WarnerMedia $100 million to retain the rights to the sitcom Friends for one more year, a colossal sum that WarnerMedia likely agreed to because it knew its own service wouldn’t be ready until 2020. But slowly and surely, the corporations are beginning to pull their properties back, recognizing that exclusivity will be the way to lure new subscribers. The boundaries of this digital age have been redrawn, and by 2020, the exciting world of streaming media might start to look very old-fashioned once again.



This story contains major spoilers through the most recent episode of Game of Thrones.

Sunday’s episode of Game of Thrones announced its theme early. “The things we do for love,” Bran Stark said, echoing the words Jaime Lannister had spoken to him in the series premiere all those years ago. “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms,” set on the eve of the Battle of Winterfell, did the emotional work that much of last season failed to do. It offered some long-delayed character development in the form of a moving meditation on the question of what we do, and whom we seek, when death is at our door. This week’s answer was, resoundingly, that it’s love—often romantic love—that matters most when the chips are down.

While Game of Thrones has featured plenty of lost or troubled romances over its run, it can sometimes be easy to forget that nearly all these couplings ended with death. “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” spent time on two of the remaining romantic pairings: Gilly and Samwell Tarly, as well as Missandei and Grey Worm. Viewers also witnessed the new but long-awaited hookup between Arya Stark and Gendry Baratheon, some affection between Brienne of Tarth and Jaime, and even a flash of tenderness between Daenerys Targaryen and Jorah Mormont.

“The things we do for love”—an expression of deep sincerity and wild devotion—feels relevant for basically every couple on the show but one: Jon Snow and Daenerys. Unfortunately, theirs is also the partnership that carries the highest stakes on the series. Game of Thrones has set up the fate of their union to be, perhaps, the fate of all humanity. On Sunday that union was fractured irrevocably—but anticlimactically—when Dany learned that Jon is really her nephew and has the stronger claim to the Iron Throne.

This reveal should have hit harder, but instead it felt like an afterthought. The fact that Jon and Dany have always felt like two awkward kids flirting—and not like two leaders in love enough to make the kinds of sacrifices that, say, Sam and Gilly have for each other—is a major flaw of the show. Because, while love mattering in the face of death was the message of “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms,” the episode also suggested that it could be the deeply human message at the core of the entire show. It is a shame that the relationship between Jon and Dany hasn’t evolved authentically enough to support the weight of that idea.

One of the show’s well-documented failings in Season 7 was how it neglected character development in favor of plot payoffs. The Dany/Jon pairing was arguably a casualty of that preference. When the two entered a cave together last season, viewers should have felt the rush of remembering Jon falling in love with his wildling love, Ygritte, in a cave in Season 3. But other than hinting at some burgeoning chemistry, the show did nothing to establish a real connection between Jon and Dany; their conversation then was all politics, all the way down. That’s exactly how it was in Sunday’s episode, when Jon told Dany of his true parentage. “You’d have a claim to the Iron Throne,” she said coldly after learning that he’s her nephew—instead of “What about us?” You could be forgiven for forgetting that earlier in that episode, Dany confessed to Jon’s sister (technically his cousin) Sansa, “I’m here because I love your brother, and I trust him. And I know he’s true to his word.” Dany added, “He’s only the second man in my life I can say that about,” in an apparent reference to her late husband, Khal Drogo.

In last week’s premiere, Dany’s adviser Tyrion looked down on his queen and Jon from a distance—a perfect encapsulation of the show’s emotionally aloof approach to the duo. Even in that all-important moment of their first coupling last season, viewers saw only Jon entering Dany’s chambers. Our perspective wasn’t with him. We were with Bran and Sam narrating the truth of Jon’s birth; then, as the camera cut to outside the room, we were with Tyrion witnessing Jon’s visit from the hall. When we cut back to the couple, they were already naked in bed. Viewers missed their first kiss, the first move from platonic to erotic. By contrast, we saw that first-kiss moment on Sunday with Arya and Gendry. We certainly saw it long ago with Jon and Ygritte, and more recently with Missandei and Grey Worm. “He loved her,” Bran said in a voice-over as Jon knocked on Dany’s door, in reference both to Jon’s father and to the White Wolf himself. On Sunday, Sansa informed Dany that Jon loves her. But viewers are always told about their love, rather than being made to see or feel it.

This oversight has consequences for the series as a whole. Game of Thrones would be a different—and better—show if viewers could buy into this once-in-a-lifetime passion. The story would be a true tragedy, a tale of choosing between the person you love and everything else that matters—the politics, the wars, the tribalism, and the history. Why and how did the show miss its chance to invest viewers in the only ongoing romance that could have repercussions for the whole Thrones universe?

“A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” cleared up the answer. For comparison’s sake, look at the sorrow and the admiration we see in Gendry when he notes that Arya has changed since he last saw her, years ago; she’s developed both brutal scars and deadly skills with a knife. Look at the emotion on Brienne’s face when Jaime finally knights her. Look at the familial goodness of Sam curled up in bed with Gilly and their son before the army of the dead arrives. These resonant pairings should recall, many seasons ago, Dany’s pain at having to leave behind a phantom Khal Drogo in the House of the Undying, and Jon’s agony at holding Ygritte in his arms as she died. Of course, one big difference between these relationships and Jon and Dany is time. The other couples formed over the course of seasons—and, most important, their coming together was never inevitable.

But, the show insists, the Mother of Dragons and the erstwhile King in the North had been fated to meet since before they were born. They are the ice and fire of the original book series’ title. The show pushed them together out of narrative inexorability, not emotional truth. If viewers accept that Jon and Dany must get together, then we never need a scene where they sit around and chat as their love blooms beneath the surface. The show seems to believe such scenes weren’t necessary, even though the two would have had plenty to bond over. They are two people who have suffered deeply in love and still carry their losses with them. They’ve both learned to set aside romance in favor of political necessity. In a better version of Game of Thrones, the richness of these parallel stories would be informing their relationship now.

Jon and Dany’s half-hearted romance is in stark contrast to a second duo whose shadow has loomed over the show from the very start: Rhaegar Targaryen and Lyanna Stark. The fact that Jon’s dead parents fell in love, not just in lust, despite the ugly politics of their time is the foundation on which the series is built. Jon was born of their stubborn and inconvenient desire to be together, despite the enmity between their houses—and this desire made all the difference for the future of Westeros.

Was romantic love Jon’s parents’ downfall, or was it their destiny? And although the acting and direction haven’t helped viewers feel it, another question lies ahead this season: Will the presumptive king and queen of the Seven Kingdoms choose love in the face of death, or will they sacrifice it?

Next week promises to bring the Battle of Winterfell and plenty of bloodshed; the function of battle episodes is to test, strengthen, and shake up character dynamics. If Thrones’ main couple were more convincingly committed to each other, “A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms” could have given elegant voice to a central question in advance of that fight: When humanity looks death in the face, will they think about love in opposition to destiny, or love as destiny? For Episode 3, fans will have to look to characters beyond Jon and Daenerys to see that tension meaningfully played out.



Films about unusual religious sects, and acts of faith that most viewers would find extreme or off-putting, walk a tight line. It’s tough to compassionately portray, for example, a snake-handling church—where preachers and congregants hold live, poisonous rattlers during service to demonstrate their connection to God—without seeming like the camera is staring in horror. At least, that was my takeaway from Them That Follow, the debut feature from Britt Poulton and Dan Madison Savage, which delves into the serpent-focused doings of a secluded Appalachian religious community. While the film tries to be a shocking window into another world, it plays more like an agog piece of tourism.

The central conceit of the fictional church run by Lemuel Childs (played by Walton Goggins) is loaded with tension. Anyone taking a venomous snake out of a box and dangling it around their person, no matter how calm they are about it, is stressful to watch. But the directors never manage to make the odd behavior in Them That Follow seem like more than a cinematic device. No doubt such churches do exist in pockets of the U.S., yet the residents of this onscreen version don’t remotely feel like real people.

Them That Follow centers on Lemuel’s daughter Mara (the extremely promising young actor Alice Englert), who has been raised in the church and thus lives an isolated existence deep in the woods. Snake handling is, unsurprisingly, quite illegal, so Lemuel and his tiny flock operate in secrecy; among the followers are the recent Oscar winner Olivia Colman as a hard-bitten convenience-store owner, a particularly tufty-bearded Jim Gaffigan, and the outstanding Kaitlyn Dever (a star in Booksmart who’s mostly wasted here as Mara’s mousy friend). The exciting cast is given little to do, since the real stars of the show are the snakes.

As the film begins, Mara has fallen in love with a local congregant named Augie (Thomas Mann) who has begun to distance himself from the church. She’s been betrothed to another, more devout boy named Garret (Lewis Pullman), and this love triangle threatens to throw the whole operation into turmoil. To Lemuel, there’s only one culprit: Satan, who gets blamed for an awful lot of chaos in this surprisingly plotty, soapy story. Someone has asthma? It’s Satan’s fault. Someone’s cheating on their betrothed? Lemuel is quick to point the finger at the supernatural forces of evil, and his big solution to any problem is to pull a snake out of a box and drape it on someone.

The film’s approach is that simplistic. While the practice of snake-handling will be hard for many to wrap their brain around, Poulton and Savage don’t ever dig into what’s driving Lemuel’s radical beliefs. Goggins is a devoted actor who does his best to sell Lemuel’s emotional certainty in what he’s doing, but he doesn’t have the gravitas that Michael Shannon displayed in another portrait of fanaticism, the outstanding and frightening Take Shelter. The zealotry that Mara and Augie find themselves combatting is too one-dimensional for their battle to have proper stakes. So much of Them That Follow’s drama would be easily deflated by someone simply picking up a phone and calling the cops, and every minute that passes without that happening is frustrating. Though Mara’s upbringing taught her that contacting the outside world is forbidden, the situation gets too dire for her passivity to remain plausible.

Given that this is a movie where people pick up snakes and hold them aloft for a while, it’s barely a spoiler to reveal that a character eventually gets bitten. It should be a moment when the film’s themes of unshakable faith collide with harsh reality, but the script (also by Poulton and Savage) doesn’t do enough to justify Lemuel’s horrifying response. The decision to sacrifice a congregant’s safety just to protect the community should come across as the ultimate act of devotion; instead, it feels like a narrative tactic to set up a tragic ending. The subject matter of Them That Follow is undeniably arresting. If only the emotional shading weren’t sorely lacking.



The affair between Sarah and David in Susan Choi’s Trust Exercise begins long before they touch each other. They’re both 15, freshmen at the Citywide Academy for the Performing Arts (CAPA), an elite institution for teenagers who show early promise as performers. The school is special, the students are special, and the energy between Sarah and David is special too, so much so that their relationship has its own prologue. They’re not a couple, yet, but everyone around them understands that they will be. They live, Choi writes, “with exclusive reference to each other,” and they’re “viewed as an unspoken duo by everyone else.” The fantasy of Sarah and David prefaces the reality; the story of the two of them is tacitly accepted before it begins.

This is how Choi ushers readers into her story—by introducing two characters and sketching out, in quick but meaningful flashes, the history that has brought them to this moment. And this is how Sarah, David, and their CAPA co-students live, too, in arcs and acts that are consciously theatrical. Some combination of their immersive dramatic education, their cultural touchstones, and their emotional plasticity as teenagers has brought them to a shared experience of the world as a malleable kind of fiction, where truth and art blend into a heady, addictive brew. Their feelings in reality inform their work onstage. Their lessons at school lead them to project heightened, histrionic scenes onto their real life. “They were all children who had previously failed to fit in,” Choi writes, “or had failed, to the point of acute misery, to feel satisfied, and they had seized on creative impulse in the hope of salvation.”

One fateful day after the summer in which Sarah and David actually begin sleeping together, David walks into class with a gift for Sarah, “striding through the big double doors, in fact bouncing, in fact funny-walking from lightness of heart because he was finally stepping onstage in the role of her boyfriend.” But the public nature of his devotion unsettles her, as he stands “flanked by a dozen of their classmates, who clung to his charisma like lint.” To David, love is a declaration. To Sarah, it’s a shared secret. Their polarized interpretations of their relationship, based on narratives that have built throughout their earlier life, precipitate a rupture between them that Sarah will try—and fail—to comprehend for the rest of her story.

Which is, it turns out, shorter than it seems. Midway through Trust Exercise, Choi reveals that the first half of the book is a story within a story written by an adult Sarah (who’s not actually called Sarah), being read now by an ancillary character named Karen (who’s not actually called Karen). Quickly, lethally, “Karen” runs through the inaccuracies and fudges in Sarah’s story, the composite characters and acts of artistic license—not to mention the abuses of power that Sarah has revised and sanitized. “The dictionary tells us that fiction is literature in the form of prose that describes imaginary events and people, is invention or fabrication, as opposed to fact,” Karen thinks. In that case, then, what is she reading? What are we?

Trust Exercise is an elaborate trick; it’s a meta work of construction and deconstruction, building a persuasive fictional world and then showing you the girders, the scaffolding underneath, and how it’s all been welded together. It’s also a work that lives in the gray area between art and reality: the space where alchemy happens. Real life bleeds into fiction, of course it does—Choi, who attended a performing-arts school herself in Houston in the 1980s (the place and the time where Trust Exercise appears to be set), has presumably drawn upon some of her own experiences in writing the book, even if only superficial ones. For the people whose ordinary lives are unceremoniously exposed, autopsied, and resurrected as amalgams for the purposes of creation, Choi seems to own, that process could easily feel like a violation.

But what Trust Exercise details, too, is the osmosis happening in the other direction. The students in Choi’s story shape their identity and their imagination around art, letting its colors seep onto their blank pages.

The first half of Trust Exercise, Sarah’s part, features a charismatic teacher named Mr. Kingsley, who slides “into the room like a knife” the first time he appears. The simile suggests that some kind of mark, trauma, or wound is about to be inflicted, and indeed Mr. Kingsley dissects the students in his class with surgical proficiency. In the Black Box, the sacred space where the theater students congregate, Mr. Kingsley has them participate in trust exercises—activities familiar to anyone who’s ever been on a corporate retreat, or in a cult. “Some involved talking and resembled group therapy,” Sarah recalls. “Some required silence, blindfolds, falling backward off tables or ladders and into the latticework of classmates’ arms.”

Returning as sophomores, the students are permitted to take a more advanced class, one Mr. Kingsley calls Ego Reconstruction, and which requires a foundation of Ego Deconstruction. As the students sit in a circle, Mr. Kingsley asks them questions intended to whittle them down to the core of their tender self, so they can start the process of authentic rebuilding. (Or something—Mr. Kingsley, if it isn’t yet clear, is possibly a charlatan, a tiny dictator among the acolytes wowed by his unconventional methods, his charisma, and his status as a member of the original cast of Cabaret.) In one exercise, he pitches the room into darkness and demands that the students identify one another by touch. The energy between Sarah and David—their potent chemistry and their acute heartbreak—is irresistible to Mr. Kingsley.

And yet the process, it seems to Sarah, is a lie. After one student, Joelle, is “stripped bare, her essence exposed” by Mr. Kingsley’s machinations, Sarah sees the “truth” of Joelle in front of her. But she also understands that “at this moment … there’s a story unfolding into which [their] true feelings don’t fit.” Acting, to Sarah, seems to require throttling her true emotions in order to have access to them at a specified time. It is, she deduces, “fidelity to authentic emotion, under imagined circumstances.” If Sarah can’t quite sense it, the reader can—Mr. Kingsley is in some ways breaking his students down so he can craft their component elements into something else; he’s directing their lives in ways that please him, as if they’re fictional characters instead of hormonal, impulsive teenagers. Only Sarah and David resist him, an act of rebellion that seals their fate in his class.

The layers in Trust Exercise are so profuse that trying to perceive them all can feel dizzying. Sarah, in the latter half of the book, is Mr. Kingsley, cutting characters out and re-gluing them in an act of literary decoupage. But so is Susan Choi. The truth of what happened at CAPA, the authentic experience, has been chopped up and reconstituted so that a different kind of truth emerges, one shaded and delineated by the author’s own experiences. “Writing fiction is like dreaming,” Choi writes in an author’s note at the end of the novel. “The recognizable and the unthinkable, the mundane and the monstrous, coalesce in the least predictable ways, in the end turning into something entirely unlike real life, and yet hopefully relevant in some way to our shared human life.”

Last weekend, after I read Trust Exercise but before I started writing about it, I ran into someone I knew from school, someone else who’d studied drama, and we talked about our shared experiences, and about that teacher. Talk to theater kids, music kids, art kids, and you will often hear about that teacher. Most educators work within the realm of fact, imparting information and assessing the ability to retain it. Artistic education is different. Some teachers interpret and posture themselves as stewards of their charges’ very creative souls, and some even go on to betray the trust that role engenders.

Karen, in Trust Exercise, recalls an event that happened to her. “She knows she’s not a special kind of victim, for having gotten shown the ropes by a much older man who, it turned out, did not care much about her. She knows this is perfectly common; just look at the stories/plays/movies about it.” Look, indeed, at Kate Walbert’s 2018 novel, His Favorites, about an English teacher who manipulates a student into a sexual relationship at an elite boarding school, and her attempts to shake not only her sense of trauma, but also how his teaching methods contoured the very ways in which her brain operates. Ann Beattie’s recent novel, A Wonderful Stroke of Luck even explores how non-abusive educators can imprint on their students’ psyche, telling the story of a manipulative philosophy teacher whose methods seem to doom one student to a life of relentless introspection.

Trust Exercise’s Karen section—for want of better phrasing—is a striking piece of work, one that exposes the fictions of Sarah’s story while engineering its own. Karen is furious. Karen is aggrieved. Sarah has taken a moment and a series of events that Karen has discussed in therapy and analyzed down to the nuanced meaning of words themselves (“by ‘dazzling’ we mean extremely impressive, beautiful, or skillful, and we also mean so bright as to cause temporary blindness”) and distorted them. Karen, in the 14 years since CAPA, has reconstructed herself, training as a dancer in a willful antidote to the wishy-washy psychological work of theater class. “True arts require discipline,” Karen thinks, “they require that you sculpt muscle and bind it to bone.” Sarah’s story destabilizes Karen’s new narrative.

And so Karen creates a new one. She devises a means of revenge that positions her as the architect of events, for the first time. She puts herself in Mr. Kingsley’s role, in Sarah’s role, in Choi’s role. She creates a simulacrum of a work of art, something that exposes the lie at the heart of her education—the idea that a performance of something can be as profound as the reality of it. And Choi, for her part, adds another layer to her work—a fictional play with “real” events inside a fictional narrative inside another work of fiction. Then she upends things again, in a final section suggesting that there were pieces within this world that neither Sarah nor Karen has honestly addressed. Sarah, Karen suspects, is also angry, and so she “inflicts an unspeakable wound, a strange sort of revenge.” Karen, at this point, is not a reliable narrator either.

And so what we’re left with, in the end, is fragments of testimony, each colored by its own particular kind of trauma, its own distorted perspective. And yet it’s possible to see all these elements independently and take away some kind of abiding reality that supersedes them all. Sarah, Karen thinks, “tells this story to reveal a hidden truth—or to hide the truth under a plausible falsehood, scrambling history unrecognizable with the logic of dream.” It’s a mission statement that’s eerily similar to the one Choi espouses in her author’s note: the intention of jumbling and distorting real things so that we can see them, somehow, clearly.



In the hours before her second suicide attempt, Juliet, the eponymous teenage protagonist of Juliet Escoria’s new novel, starts “doing the thing where I removed myself from myself.” As if floating outside her own body, she sees herself as a too-skinny girl with tangled hair, beset by hallucinatory demons, whose expression is “so flat … that she might as well have been dead.” The vision leads Juliet to conclude, temporarily, that there is no hope for this girl to go on living. She even implies that killing this version of herself would be an act of mercy: “She looked so lost,” Juliet explains. “I felt so sorry for her.”

The moment—one of extreme alienation and extreme empathy—captures the challenge of writing about some types of mental illness, of making legible the kind of pain and despair that have no obvious cause. In Juliet the Maniac, Escoria interrupts the main first-person narrative with archival documents and flash-forwards that allow her to recount Juliet’s struggles with bipolar disorder from a slight remove. The effect is destabilizing, but also comprehensive: Readers are immersed in the girl’s state of mind but can also see what her experience looks like from the outside.

Rabbits for Food, by Binnie Kirshenbaum, shows a similar split in perspective. The novel follows a writer named Bunny who, while hospitalized for severe depression, composes a fictionalized account of her experiences, telling her own story in the third person as if watching herself from a safe distance away. Kirshenbaum breaks up this restrained narrative with prompts from Bunny’s therapeutic writing workshop, revealing a more complete and sometimes contradictory picture of a woman who’s struggling to rationalize what’s happened to her. For both Bunny and Juliet, dissociation is a symptom of and a coping mechanism for the mood disorders that alter their emotions and behavior. Escoria and Kirshenbaum structure their novels to reproduce this feeling, interweaving different perspectives and timelines to illustrate how mental illness can attack a person’s sense of self.      

In Escoria’s novel, Juliet’s fear that she is becoming a different person is one of the defining features of her bipolar disorder. At 15, Juliet is a confident and high-achieving, if rebellious, student. As her symptoms get worse—“an army of shadows” that press against her chest and prevent her from speaking, words in her textbooks that appear to disintegrate before her eyes—she feels as if her old self is being replaced by someone she doesn’t recognize. “Her name was Juliet,” she thinks. “She was the daughter of Helen and Robert. She was no genius. She was just crazy.” When she wakes up in a hospital room after her first suicide attempt, her guilt over hurting her parents is overwhelming; she feels that she has “mutated from their daughter into a monster.” And even as an adult, Juliet reflects in a “letter from the future,” she can’t reconcile her own identity with the girl who tried to kill herself: “Who is that girl in that story? That is some other girl. I do not own her, or know her, but she both owns and knows me.”

Understanding and exorcising this other, wounded self is the implicit purpose of Juliet the Maniac, which is structured as if the adult Juliet is compiling a case report on her own breakdown. The story—which begins just before Juliet’s first symptoms appear and continues through her treatment at a boarding school for troubled teenagers—is told in short first-person vignettes. Interspersed among these flashes of memory and introspection, however, are clinical documents that provide a tether to Juliet’s external reality.

“A fact sheet from the future” on the side effects of antidepressants in adolescents suggests a cause for the suicidal feelings that, in the present, seem to come out of nowhere. “Patient logs” from the Redwood Trails boarding school track the passage of time in terms of Juliet’s evolving symptoms and growing list of medications. Images of doctors’ evaluations and Juliet’s own handwritten notes appear throughout the text as if photocopied onto the pages, along with captions (“Luke Letter (final: copy, made for personal records), January 2000”) that mark them as artifacts to be examined. The contrast between these insertions and the narrated passages is jarring; it forces the reader to move between deeply interior and distant views of Juliet’s life, each of which seem to call the other’s accuracy into question.

Rabbits for Food has a similar, though less immediately apparent, frame in which a protagonist takes stock of the factors that have affected her mental health. The novel begins in first person, partway into Bunny’s stay at the psychiatric ward, then flashes back to a third-person account of how she came to be there. The third-person passages are Bunny’s own writing: a novelized version of her illness and treatment. Her responses to prompts from the creative writing therapy group that she reluctantly attends are also woven throughout. They appear as diary entries that reveal some of the most painful and formative moments of her life, but eventually shift into second person as Bunny distances herself from her own revelations.

This structure of interruption and doubling back—with some passages reproduced almost identically though from a different perspective—is disorienting, but appropriate. One symptom of Bunny’s depression, her narrator explains early on, is short-term memory loss that amounts to a kind of narrative breakdown: “She finds she can describe a scene, but the connective tissue needed to tell a story becomes white space, like lines skipped on the page.” Accordingly, the chapters of her story become shorter and more fragmented around moments of emotional extremity, and Kirshenbaum withholds the key event precipitating Bunny’s depression until late in the book.

Bunny, like Juliet, struggles with self-loathing and alienation as a result of her illness; she experiences this less as a division of her identity, however, than as an urge toward self-erasure. In depression, she loses her appetite and becomes “insubstantial, a manifestation of the wish to disappear.” When she can’t bring herself to attempt suicide, she runs her passport and driver’s license through a paper-shredder, and then isn’t sure how to respond when her husband comes home and asks her, “Are you here?” Bunny embraces the image of herself as “a person who is not easy to like”—language that adopts the perspective of an outside observer just as her third-person narration does. This description makes it easier for Bunny to see herself as a character—and easier, in turn, to see her suffering as fiction, to say to herself, as she does at the hospital, “This is not real, this can’t be real.”

Bunny’s attitude could be read as denial. And yet, to the extent that mental illness challenges a person’s most closely held certainties, there’s a measure of healing in creating a narrative, in deciding what is true. The distancing tactics that Kirshenbaum and Escoria use to structure their stories—Bunny’s manuscript and writing prompts, Juliet’s patient logs and letters—communicate the characters’ feelings of isolation and disruption. These framing devices also provide Bunny and Juliet with a buffer from events that might otherwise be too painful to face. In treating their circumstances as fiction, they regain some of the autonomy they’ve lost.



Last Wednesday, Gady Levy, the executive director of the Streicker Center at New York’s Temple Emanu-El, herded the Israeli actors Neta Riskin and Dov Glickman through the cavernous synagogue’s hallways. Riskin and Glickman, who play the daughter-father pair Giti and Shulem on the Israeli television show Shtisel, had just left a room jammed with donors waiting to get their picture taken with their favorite characters. Downstairs, another group was awaiting its photo-op. Outside the building, the line for the main event—a panel discussion with the actors—took up an entire block on Fifth Avenue and curled halfway down both 65th and 66th Streets.

Temple Emanu-El—which hosted the Shtisel event in partnership with the UJA-Federation of New York and the Jewish Week Media Group—had originally planned only one night of programming. But 2,300 seats sold out in just over four hours. So it added a second, which sold out in seven hours. Even after that, according to one synagogue official, roughly 30 people a day kept calling, begging for tickets. Mark Medin, the UJA’s executive vice president, told me he had “never seen this [level of] interest and excitement for any program,” which is saying something, given that the Streicker Center last year hosted former President Barack Obama. Scurrying down the hall, Levy concurred: “Obama was easier.”

What explains Shtisel-mania? For starters, as many critics have noted, Shtisel, which has been streaming on Netflix since December, is marvelous TV. In two seasons, it won a slew of Ophirs, the Israeli Emmys, including for Best Drama and for Best Actor, Best Directing, and Best Script in a drama series. The show’s main characters include Akiva (played by Michael Aloni, who also appeared at Temple Emanu-El), a gentle ultra-Orthodox (in Hebrew, haredi) 20-something whose romantic and artistic yearnings conflict with his father’s expectations and the strict norms of the haredi world. There’s also Akiva’s recently widowed father, Shulem (Glickman), who is seeking love as well—and a hot meal, which he often obtains from neighborhood widows—but is haunted by visitations from his dead wife. A third protagonist, Shulem’s daughter, Giti (Riskin), struggles ferociously to keep her own family together and to maintain outward appearances after her husband temporarily abandons them.

But if Shtisel’s themes—the bonds of family, the pursuit of love, and the relationship between the living and the dead—are universal, its setting, the ultra-Orthodox Geula neighborhood of Jerusalem, is to most Jews (let alone non-Jews) mysterious. Shtisel re-creates it obsessively. One of the show’s creators, Yehonatan Indursky, grew up haredi in Jerusalem, and Shtisel employs mashgiachs (supervisors) to ensure that every detail is correct. At Temple Emanu-El, Riskin explained how—as a secular Israeli—she had to relearn how to walk in order to play Giti. “Walk,” her mashgiach told her, “as if you are trying to get somewhere as quickly as possible while being invisible.”

Another expression of this meticulousness involves language. As Shayna Weiss, the associate director of the Schusterman Center for Israel Studies at Brandeis University, has noted, the older characters in Shtisel—Shulem; his misanthropic brother, Nukhem (Sasson Gabai); and his riotously funny mother (Hanna Rieber in the first season and Leah Koenig in the second)—generally speak to one another in Yiddish. The younger characters speak mostly in Hebrew. But even haredi Hebrew is distinct. It includes Yiddish expressions, and many haredim use Ashkenazi (European) pronunciations that differ from the Sephardic (Middle Eastern) pronunciations that are normative in modern Hebrew. If that’s not complicated enough, the characters sometimes employ religious terms drawn from Aramaic.

Shtisel’s combination of radical particularity and radical universality lies at the core of its appeal. At Temple Emanu-El, Aloni quoted a fan who told him, “I’m a Norwegian Christian, and watching Shtisel makes me long for my childhood in Geula.”

Still, it’s telling that so many American Jews are eager to find universality in a form of particularity that, in the past, they found deeply unpleasant. In her 2009 book, Doubting the Devout: The Ultra-Orthodox in the Jewish American Imagination, the University of Rochester’s Nora Rubel notes that haredim have often been a “source of anxiety and embarrassment for ‘modern’ Jews.” In his 1959 short story “Eli, the Fanatic,” Philip Roth conjures Eli Peck, a prosperous, suburban Jew who fears that a nearby ultra-Orthodox yeshiva will imperil his hard-won status. Eli asks that the neighboring haredim only enter his town “provided that they are attired in clothing usually associated with American life in the 20th century.” But when a box with a haredi man’s suit is left on his porch, Eli—transfixed—begins wearing it; the story ends with him being dragged off to a mental hospital.

Roth’s message is clear: By refusing to adapt to contemporary America, the haredim imperil those Jews who have. In Annie Hall (1977), Woody Allen’s character, Alvy Singer, is eating Easter dinner with Annie Hall’s family. As they pass the ham, Alvy imagines the Hall family picturing him as an ultra-Orthodox Jew, someone who—despite his best efforts—is irredeemably different. In her 2005 short story, “Long-Distance Client,” Allegra Goodman describes the “revulsion and embarrassment” felt by Mel, a liberal Jew from Canaan, Connecticut, at the Bialystoker Hasidim who live nearby. (Hasidim are ultra-Orthodox Jews who cluster around a hereditary leader, or rebbe.) This hostility hasn’t confined itself to fiction. In 1993, Tom Dine, the executive director of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, was forced to resign after saying that “mainstream Jews” viewed haredim as “smelly” and “low class.”

One might think these resentments would loom even larger today. The haredim are growing as a share of the American Jewish population, and they’re doing plenty of things to upset the contemporary equivalents of Eli Peck. In recent years, the New York press has been filled with articles about metzitzah b’peh, the practice of oral suction after a bris (ritual circumcision) that has given some ultra-Orthodox infants herpes. Ex-haredim are suing their Brooklyn yeshivas for failing to teach them English. And this year, ultra-Orthodox New York has become the epicenter of the largest measles outbreak in decades.

Yet the American Jewish response to Shtisel has been rapturous nonetheless. It helps that the show is set far from suburban America, in Israel. It’s not that ultra-Orthodox and non-Orthodox Jews get along better there. To the contrary, the haredi exemption from compulsory military service constitutes one of the nastiest fissures in Israeli politics—it’s the primary reason Benjamin Netanyahu couldn’t form a coalition government in May. But Shtisel bypasses such fraught issues. And at a time when many American Jews are struggling with the ethics of political Zionism, the show—despite featuring haredi Jews who don’t identify as Zionists themselves—constitutes a form of cultural Zionism, an easier way to connect with the Jewish state. 

American Jews, however, likely don’t only find Shtisel appealing because it’s set in Israel. They may also find it appealing because the anxiety about fitting in that plagued Eli Peck and Alvy Singer has been replaced by an anxiety about Jewish unity. In many extended American Jewish families, it’s not just hard to talk politics around the dinner table; differences in the observance of Jewish dietary laws make it hard to eat together at the dinner table at all. American Jewry’s bitter political divisions over Israel—and the widening religious and cultural divides between ultra-Orthodox, modern Orthodox, and non-Orthodox American Jews—have led many to fear that Jews are becoming strangers to one another.

Shtisel soothes those fears. Jewish tradition encourages Jews to think of themselves as an extended family; by reaching into the most extreme and insular corner of the Jewish world to find universal themes, Shtisel sends the message that, despite everything, they still are. The panelists at Temple Emanu-El repeatedly mentioned that even though they don’t have televisions, many haredim secretly watch the show. They want to be connected, too.

Like the dream sequences in which Shulem and Akiva encounter the dead, there’s an element of fantasy to this. When I asked Samuel Heilman, a sociologist at Queens College and one of America’s foremost experts on the ultra-Orthodox, about the Shtisel phenomenon, he replied, “I suspect that the closer people are to the real haredim, the less they are charmed by them.” That may be precisely the point. The more actual Jewish unity fades, the stronger the yearning for it becomes. And if Shtisel is about anything, it’s about the power of yearnings that remain unfulfilled.



Remember world peace? It’s been a while since that dream was so common as to be a punch line. Beauty queens now skip the pleas for global harmony and instead get specific about Latin American territorial disputes. The peace symbol was initially designed to rally for nuclear disarmament, one of the many international consensuses unraveling lately. Peace as a cultural obsession, a meme, belongs to other eras: the hippie marches of the ’60s and early ’70s, and the end-of-history mirage of the ’90s.

Vampire Weekend’s Father of the Bride is an album about world peace, which might explain why it uses very particular, almost forgotten sounds and images from more idealistic times. The cover features a globe styled like something that Another Mother for Peace would have sent to Lyndon B. Johnson, or that AOL would have put on a CD for 500 hours of free internet. Intricate roots guitar draws not only from Boomer bands—the single “This Life” is nearly a remix of Van Morrison’s “Brown Eyed Girl”—but also from Clinton-era buskers such as Blind Melon and Counting Crows. When Ezra Koenig name-checks “Simple Twist of Fate,” it seems as much a reference to the Bob Dylan classic as to its rendition on the 1991 self-titled album by the Jerry Garcia Band. Tie-dye is back yet again, and Vampire Weekend are the nu, nu flower children.

The groovy aesthetic reads as a homecoming of sorts. In the three addictive albums they released from 2008 to 2013, Vampire Weekend captured the very particular perspective of an overeducated American male growing up in a globalized age. Koenig’s characters made pilgrimages to Dharamsala on spring break and spent December drinking horchata, all the while streaming Fela Kuti compilations, Fleetwood Mac B sides, and hyphy mixtapes. On densely allusive and yet miraculously light-feeling pop songs, hyperconnected 20-somethings wrangled, in their neurotic way, with universal concerns: love, God, punctuation. “I’m ready for the house,” Koenig sighed on 2013’s wearily beautiful Modern Vampires of the City, seeming to yearn to settle down.

In the six years since then, the singer has explored other creative outlets (creating a Netflix anime; podcasting; writing a hook for Beyoncé), lost a bandmate (the keyboardist and songwriter Rostam Batmanglij quit amicably), and had a child with his partner, Rashida Jones. These changes feel intrinsic to Father of the Bride, which is shaggier, grander, brasher, and yet more ambivalent than any previous Vampire Weekend album. With 18 ornate and overwhelming songs, it gives the feeling of sorting through a fabulously cluttered garage, which befits Koenig taking on 30-something-dad concerns: family, the planet, and the connection between the two.

The album kicks off with a wedding. On “Hold You Now,” Koenig and Danielle Haim of Haim play a groom and bride considering splitting up rather than walking down the aisle. The gentle-voiced singers trade verses twice more over the course of the album, and each time it evokes classic country-couple banter (Koenig has said he was thinking of George Jones and Tammy Wynette). But each time, there’s also a strange sonic twist. For “Hold You Now,” it’s a chanting choir sampled from Hans Zimmer’s soundtrack for the 1998 World War II epic The Thin Red Line, conveying not only sanctity, but also apocalyptic stakes. “Why’s your heart grown heavy, boy, when things were feeling light?” Haim asks. “Turning this June morning into some dark judgment night.”

That question—how can dark exist in brightness?—recurs throughout. Amid the PLUR-rave vibes of the lead single, “Harmony Hall,” Koenig laments “wicked snakes inside a place you thought was dignified.” The mischievous bass line and kooky bwoings of “How Long?” are like a laugh track as Koenig sings of heartbreak at midnight Mass. Accompanied by a cha-cha metronome, “Spring Snow” tells of a freak storm enabling a bonus night of cuddling. It ends, “Here comes the sun / Those toxic old rays.” On Father of the Bride, makeups are breakups, givers are takers, and love means leaving.

The double-edged motif well suits anxieties about humankind’s self-endangerment from climate change and war. The finale, “Jerusalem, New York, Berlin,” concludes with what could be a warning about the West’s recent fascist tingles: “Let them win the battle / But don’t let them restart that genocidal feeling that beats in every heart.” Yet Koenig’s more interested in drawing connections—metaphorical and literal at once—between personal and global serenity. He’s realized bliss is a gift that expires.

The album’s at its best when it confronts that reality with enjoy-it-while-it-lasts equanimity. Take the stanzas of “This Life,” each one rich in meaning but also plainspoken. “Baby, I know pain is as natural as the rain,” goes the first line. “I just thought it didn’t rain in California.” Later, the breathing and teeming anthem “Stranger” conjures a cozy scene of dancing at home with Jones and her sister Kidada. In a fun bit of sacrilege, Koenig rewrites the chorus of the Five Stairsteps’ “O-o-h Child” to say that things are going to “stay strange,” not “get easier.” Then he plays clever games with party clichés, yelping that he “might get low” but for now he’s “too high to know.”

Not all the songs are so delectable. Vampire Weekend’s music once gave the feeling of complex problems being solved effortlessly, but here, the riddles tend to remain and the work is visible. As plummy acoustic sounds and fidgety digital bits pile up symphonically, the emotions behind them can remain remote. Father of the Bride thus may leave longtime fans wondering on first, third, or fifth listen if they’ll love this album like they’ve loved the previous ones. Certainly there’s a depth and courage that’s admirable, but there’s also a buoyant tone that teeters between defiance and sarcasm. Koenig’s sweetest-sounding chat with Haim offers this sad paradox: “We belong together … Baby, it don’t mean we’ll stay together.” It also chipperly makes a comparison that’s all too ominous today: “We stay united like these old states.”



Pro wrestling: Is there a deeper homage to the innocence of the American character? Around these gifted performers, these godlike men with their huge and brilliantly crude personas, spreads the American public at its most medieval, its most pageantry-besotted and morally inflamed. Boo! Hiss! Hooray! Not everybody believes it’s real, of course. Maybe nobody believes it’s real. But many choose to be persuaded by its magnificence. “The public appears disposed to be amused even when they are conscious of being deceived,” said P. T. Barnum, who knew what he was talking about.

Viceland’s six-part series Dark Side of the Ring gets at the real/not-real question by zooming in on a series of shadowy happenings from the golden age: the pro-wrestling boom of the ’80s, when the rise of cable and pay-per-view coincided with an evolutionary leap in promotional razzmatazz. The series’ episode titles have the voltage of pure pulp: “The Killing of Bruiser Brody,” “The Last of the Von Erichs,” “The Montreal Screwjob.” And the stories are told via smudged and dreamlike dramatizations—like Dateline on opioids—and a roster of excitable, voluble, unreliable talking heads from the world of pro wrestling.

The announcer/writer Jim Cornette, aroused by the memory of a particularly tricky moment of wrestling meta-drama, demands that the camera attend to the raised hairs on his forearm. Bruce Prichard, now a WWE executive, once played the character “Brother Love”—a manager/barker, face painted red like Henry Rollins in the “Liar” video, wearing a suit of televangelist cocaine white, and roaring in a southern accent about how he lurrrved everyone. As an analyst, he sits somewhere near the center of Dark Side of the Ring, genially in possession of all the angles. “Sometimes,” Prichard says, “when people want more of a story to be there, that just isn’t there … they try to create it.”

And then there’s just simple, beautiful credulousness. In the first episode of Dark Side of the Ring, Jake “The Snake” Roberts explains the difficulties that his fellow WWE wrestler “Macho Man” Randy Savage had when he went to visit his in-laws in Tennessee. The problem was this: Savage’s real-life wife, Elizabeth Hulette, also played his in-the-ring manager/helpmeet “Miss Elizabeth”—immaculate, demure, largely mute, a source of fluttering reaction shots (worshipful-eyed, hand-to-mouth, etc.). And when The Snake, the python-toting heel, “abused” Miss Elizabeth during a bout with Macho Man, there were domestic consequences.

“Whenever I slapped Elizabeth, and then they tried to go home to see her family … Grandpa meets him on the porch,” The Snake recalls. “Says, ‘You’re not coming in this house, boy. You promised us you’d always protect our little girl.’ The only way he could gain access back into their home was basically kicking my ass. Getting even, so to speak.” Musing on the complications of Savage and Hulette’s marriage, Prichard has the best line in the whole show: “Life imitating art? Sometimes art imitates life. And then you get really fucked up.”

Frank Goodish was a former NFL player with a wife and a young child. In the ring, and sometimes out of it, he was Bruiser Brody: an archetype of American wildness, a long-haired, fur-booted, chain-swinging, 300-pound amalgam of Hugh Glass and Ted Nugent. Goodish/Brody’s forehead was thickly seamed with scar tissue from the regular “bladings,” or controlled bloodlettings, with which he would enhance his act. “He was a pretty decent guy,” allows his fellow wrestler Tony Atlas. “If he liked you.”

Goodish was killed before an event in Puerto Rico in 1988, stabbed to death in a shower stall. Had the unhinged frontier spirit of the Brody persona finally delivered him to a hinterland too far? His assailant, José Huertas Gonzélez, who wrestled under the name “Invader I,” was acquitted by a local jury on the grounds of self-defense. “The fans in Puerto Rico believed wrestling was real,” declares the former wrestler and commentator Dutch Mantel. “It was the major reason José was acquitted—because they believed Brody was this character, this wild-looking psychopath hulking figure.” No resolution, no clarity: Justice blunders, lost somewhere between the fantastical force of the Bruiser Brody image and the too-real squalor of his death.

A “work,” in pro wrestling, is a scripted sequence. A “shoot” is what happens when the script, for whatever reason, is left behind and the wrestlers or their handlers start improvising. And in Dark Side of the Ring, it all comes together—or falls apart—in the Montreal Screwjob: the epic 1997 real-unreal mash-up in which WWF Heavyweight Champion Bret Hart, on live TV, was “cheated” of his belt by the dastardly machinations of the WWF owner Vince McMahon. Hart was set up—unexpectedly subdued with a move called “the sharpshooter” so that the belt went to his opponent, Shawn Michaels. That’s Hart’s story, anyway, and he’s sticking to it.

Certainly, the rivalry between him and Michaels seems to have been real enough: Hart describes a dressing-room confrontation in Hartford, Connecticut, that found the two wrestlers tearing at each other’s beautiful long hair “like two prostitutes fighting in downtown.” Cornette remembers what happened next: “Here comes Shawn, and he’s hot, and he’s got in his hand a handful of his hair. It looked like a small opossum. And I’ll never forget this—he said, ‘This is an unsafe working environment!’” Anyway, the Screwjob goes down, Michaels takes the belt, Hart berserks around the ring, smashes up some equipment, leans over the ropes, and spits on McMahon. “It’s a total work,” pronounces the former wrestler Scott Hall. “Everybody was in on it and they all did it together.”

Sleaze and disaster wash around Dark Side of the Ring. Along with the capacity to create those huge, crude personas come some huge, crude appetites and some huge, crude vulnerabilities. Did the handsome Gino Hernandez—imagine the Miami Vice theme tune with muscles—overdose, or was he murdered by drug people? How is it possible that Fritz Von Erich, the iron patriarch of the Von Erich wrestling dynasty, lived to see five of his six sons predecease him, three of them by their own hand? Was “The Fabulous Moolah” a pioneer of women’s pro wrestling and a wonderful mentor, or an abusive den mother running a factory farm of love-starved apprentices? Unanswered questions. If there’s truth in or around pro wrestling, the producers seem to suggest, it’s nonbinary.

It makes a great spectacle, this show. The old wrestlers are fascinating: battered, charismatic hulks; gentled-down titans. Hall—whose eventful life could comfortably fill another six episodes—from time to time drops his voice into a kind of thunderbolt-tossing growl. He chews a tiny, twinkling toothpick. We see close-ups of his large, exquisitely manicured hands. How could they ever hope to be ordinary, these people, to have ordinary existences? Hulk Hogan’s ex-wife, Linda, does an amazing impression of Savage, his engorged vocal style. It’s a tawdry, loopy, ultra-vivid world. Work or shoot, you keep it going. What’s larger than life? More life.



The magic of Vida, which returns Sunday for a second season on Starz, lies in the way it marries specificity—of culture, of place, of sexuality—with universality. Tanya Saracho, the playwright and TV writer who created the series, layers texture and tiny details throughout her story, keenly aware of how loaded simple objects can be. In Vida, even a brand of hot sauce can be a powerful signal of identity, as well as a portal to childhood memories. A wall of scribbles and Polaroid photos in a bar isn’t just graffiti—it’s a portrait of a community, and a message to other patrons that a space is safe for them, too.

Season 1 captured a homecoming that precipitated major revelations and personal roller coasters. The sisters Emma (played by Mishel Prada) and Lyn Hernandez (Melissa Barrera) returned to Boyle Heights, in Los Angeles, after the death of their mother, Vidalia—known as “Vida”—only to discover that she had been keeping secrets. These included the fact that she had a wife, Eddy (Ser Anzoategui), despite having thrown Emma out of her house years earlier for being gay. In addition, Vida’s bar was financially underwater, and a predatory local mortgage broker was looking to foreclose on it and turn the building into high-end condos. In the final episode of Season 1, Eddy was brutally beaten in a homophobic attack after being driven out of the bar by Emma. The event forced both sisters to see that their mother’s business was more than bad debt—it was a linchpin for a community who understood it to be their home as much as Emma and Lyn did.

In just six episodes, with a team staffed entirely of Latinx writers, Saracho crafted a story rooted in personal experiences. Vida’s first season explored subjects as complex as gentefication and internalized homophobia, capturing Emma’s fierce anger at her mother for the shame she made Emma feel about herself, as well as the efforts of local activists to preserve their community. But the show also considered broader themes: grief, nostalgia, sisterhood, hope. In the Season 1 finale, Emma and Lyn determined that they wanted to try and keep the bar open, culminating in a gorgeous final shot as the women watched the sun rise over their neighborhood, the cityscape of downtown L.A. shimmering in the distance.

In the second season, which has been expanded into 10 half-hour episodes, the partnership between the sisters remains fragile, while the financial effort to save the bar is an uphill battle. Lyn is still hedonistic, selfish, and chaotic; Emma is as emotionally withholding, icy, and demanding as ever. (“You are the classic cautionary tale of why mothers need to hug their children,” a girlfriend tells her.) Emma’s efforts to upgrade the bar to attract new clientele and ensure its future enrage community activists, who see bits of the fabric of Boyle Heights being chipped away. Lyn’s mistakes from Season 1—sleeping with her engaged ex, Johnny (Carlos Miranda), and engaging in credit-card fraud—keep catching up with her. Eddy tries to recover from her injuries while also grieving Vida, whose unseen presence looms over the series. She’s there in the blinking neon sign over the bar that bears her name, in the possessions Emma gathers for a garage sale, in the secrets that somehow keep emerging.

But Vida is most present in the sisters, and in the ways their lives reflect how she raised them. Prada communicates how much Emma’s modes of behavior come from her mother’s hurtful (and hypocritical) rejection, and how Emma has constructed armor around herself—lipstick, an immaculately blunt bob, a forbidding affect—that keep other people at arm’s length. Emma is enraged when her appearance is derisively labeled as “baby queer” at a gay wedding in the third episode, as if she’s not yet confident enough in her identity to dress the way she really wants to. The scene itself, with its discussions about sexual “tourism” and gender binaries and the rites of passage of coming out, is anchored in particulars. It’s also riveting, fraught with tension, and set against the backdrop of an event celebrating the relatively new freedom of Americans to love whomever they choose.

Vida is replete with graphic sex scenes, almost all of which serve a distinct purpose. Emma and Lyn’s sexuality is key to understanding them as characters, and sex, in the show, is rarely just about gratification. Saracho has a shrewd awareness of how people often weaponize sex: for distraction, for power, for consolation. Emma has casual encounters with men and women, but it isn’t until the final episode of Season 2 that she gets intimate enough with someone to kiss them. Lyn, as stunted as Emma by Vida’s pronouncements that beauty is her only asset, uses sex as a tool to get what she wants, whether it’s emotional or material. She’s internalized the idea that her effect on men is her currency.

The new episodes continue to ask questions about ownership and identity and authenticity, but always with the acknowledgment of how complex these issues can be. When a new character, Nico (played spectacularly by Roberta Colindrez), makes fun of Emma for her choice of condiment, Emma fights back. “All my life I’ve been policed for being the thing I already am. Why can’t it be a Mexican thing if a Mexican is putting Valentina on a taco?” Lyn, trying to start a live-music night with Latinx artists to bring more business to the bar, is railed against for attracting hipsters to the neighborhood, and slandered online as “Coconut Becky.” Johnny’s sister, Marisol (Chelsea Rendon), is an activist who finds herself in the middle of opposing forces she sympathizes with: the people trying to preserve Boyle Heights in totality, and the people who think even beloved local institutions sometimes have to adapt to stay alive.

That these conversations are happening at all in a mainstream TV drama feels profound. That Saracho is able to weave them so fluently into a series that reverberates with the aches and joys and conflicts of everyday life is remarkable. Vida isn’t special only because it’s putting underrepresented American stories onscreen. It’s special because it’s doing it so well, mining the epic drama and the discrete experiences of its characters’ lives to create something that’s elaborate, distinct, and beautiful all at the same time.



Earlier this year, as the winter holiday season ended and the winter kept right on wintering, we sent an invitation: If you could create a new holiday from scratch—or more widely celebrate an existing but lesser-known one—we asked, what would it be?

You responded in force. We received hundreds of nominations, for holidays both whimsical (for example: Kid for a Day Day) and meaningful (for example: Get Back in Touch Day), and narrowed those down to 12 finalists. We asked you to vote on your favorites—and, once again, you answered the call.

Thanks so much for sharing your ideas and preferences. Because now, based on your votes, we have a very clear winner. And that winner is …

Step Away Day! 

This is a day reserved for taking stock, taking a breath, and putting down the screen(s). Essentially, it’s a collective “tech sabbath”—a time to relax in whatever way most refreshes you. That could mean a day spent on your own or with loved ones; indoors or outdoors; at home or on a new adventure—as long as you don’t have to go online to do it. Many thanks to Laurie Dewitt of California; Keita; Jennifer of Iowa; and Tessa of Toronto for the nomination.

Now let’s talk celebrations! We hope that Step Away Day will soon catch on with schools and workplaces the world over. Until then, though—since our internet-addled lives mean that one person’s most convenient time to abandon screens will vary from another’s—we won’t limit Step Away Day observations to a single date. Instead, we’ll offer one more invitation and challenge: Celebrate the day on your own time, however works best for you, by the end of April. (The Culture Desk’s version of the celebration will very likely take place on a Sunday and involve spending time in nature: hiking, journaling, picnicking, chatting, and reading—books, and also print editions of The Atlantic. We will also definitely find a way for things to involve cake, just because … cake.)

We’d love to hear what you did to step away (or how you’re planning to do it). Were you able to fully disconnect—and for how long? Did you find creative ways to keep your phone from tempting you away from your book? Did you decide to go on an adventure, only to realize that you weren’t quite sure which road to take without the help of Google Maps? Did the time offline give you any insights? Did you have cake? 

Please do let us know at letters@theatlantic.com. And thank you again for brainstorming, voting, and celebrating with us. We wish you rest, relaxation, and refreshment whenever you decide to join your fellow Atlantic readers in Stepping Away.



Before the release of Avengers: Endgame, the biggest opening weekend of all time for the U.S. box office was April 27–29, 2018, when the previous entry in the Avengers series, Infinity War, debuted in theaters. That film made a staggering $257 million, and theaters sold $314 million worth of tickets to all movies in total that weekend, the most money ever made in a three-day span at the time. That $314 million figure seemed like a ceiling—there’s only a finite amount of cinema seats available in the country, so if you’re selling out every show, would it even be possible to eclipse a number like that?

Last weekend, Avengers: Endgame did just that, making $356 million over just three days, with theaters selling a total of $392 million worth of tickets for all 45 movies playing that weekend. The owners of the major theater chains sent out triumphant press releases, touting the value of the cinema experience and explaining how they managed to pack in screenings for a movie with an extra-long running time of 182 minutes. Mostly, they pulled it off by sucking all the air out of the room: Recent releases such as Us, Hellboy, and Pet Sematary were largely pushed out of theaters, dropping from more than 1,000 screens apiece, and the weekend’s second-biggest film turned out to be another Marvel movie, the March release Captain Marvel, which offered a superhero alternative if Endgame showtimes were sold out.

So while Endgame is certainly a cause worth celebrating for exhibitors, a big-selling rebuke to the idea that traditional filmgoers are largely content to stay home these days, it’s also a sign that the future of the cinema experience lies largely with colossal event movies. Ticket sales have mostly been down in 2019, as studios rolled out winter offerings such as Alita: Battle Angel and The Lego Movie 2, which failed to connect on a major level with audiences. Big Marvel movies will help buoy the box office, and there are other franchise films on the horizon, mostly produced by Disney, that should be similar smash hits, such as Star Wars: Episode IX, Frozen 2, and remakes such as Aladdin and The Lion King.

Disney has charted an indisputably successful course in offering crowd-pleasing, family-friendly blockbusters that demand to be seen on opening weekend, not just for the epic visuals but also to avoid being spoiled on plot details. But this means that other big studios have scrambled to echo that approach rather than find their own. Sony teamed with Disney to release a new series of Spider-Man movies, and has launched Venom and other planned spin-offs within the partnership. Warner Bros. has pushed out films based on the DC Comics world to mixed reception, with new heroes such as Wonder Woman and Aquaman being hits, but expected slam-dunk team-ups such as Justice League falling flat. Universal is trying to turn its Fast & Furious movies into a universe of their own, with the awkwardly titled Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw coming this August.

All these efforts are designed to tap into the unique cultural appeal of the Marvel movies, which over 11 years have built up unprecedented audience goodwill around the world. The global total for Endgame’s opening week was more than $1.2 billion, another record, mostly thanks to a colossal $330 million take in China, where Marvel has found a foothold that other brands such as Star Wars have not. For box-office watchers, the next question is whether Endgame can eclipse the all-time domestic and worldwide sales records currently held by Star Wars: The Force Awakens (which made $936 million domestically) and Avatar (which made $2.7 billion globally). Both of those were Christmas films, which tend to have longer shelf lives in theaters because of the dearth of big studio offerings in January and February; Endgame will face bigger competition over the summer. But it might still beat all comers.

Every prior box-office-record holder has succeeded as a cultural milestone of sorts. Avatar pioneered new 3-D technology in cinemas; Titanic was a word-of-mouth sensation that drew teenagers in for multiple viewings; Jurassic Park marked the dawn of the CGI era; and Star Wars and Jaws were the dawn of the blockbuster itself. If Endgame bests them all, it’ll be thanks to overwhelming audience loyalty to an entire brand, a 22-film series reaching a satisfyingly undeniable conclusion (though there’s still room for plenty more Marvel movies in the future). For Disney, that’s a vindication of a decade-long strategy. For the rest of the film industry, it could sound a death knell for any other theatrical approach.



The Marvel Cinematic Universe is defined by its spandex-clad stars—heroes including Captain America and Iron Man who’ve powered the franchise to unprecedented popularity over 11 years, most recently resulting in the record-breaking success of Avengers: Endgame. The interconnected nature of the 22 Marvel movies means a single film like Endgame, which brings the entire ensemble together for a big goodbye, can have a sweeping effect. But pulling off such a project also requires a ton of coordination behind the scenes. Anthony and Joe Russo—who’ve directed four Marvel movies in total, including Endgame—have built a reputation for that kind of managerial mastery.

Before the two were brought into the Marvel fold by the company’s chief producer, Kevin Feige, nothing about the Russos’ resume suggested that they’d be particularly suited to big-budget superhero storytelling. After being discovered by Steven Soderbergh at the 1997 Slamdance Film Festival, they made a charming indie caper called Welcome to Collinwood and otherwise mostly worked in television, helming the pilot episodes of comedies such as Arrested Development, Community, and Happy Endings. A look back at Arrested Development suggests the Russos’ adeptness for juggling massive casts in a way that allows everyone moments to shine—something the Marvel movies needed to do as the franchise rolled on.

In 2014, the Russos made Captain America: The Winter Soldier, a well-liked entry that placed the star-spangled hero in a story with the air of a ’70s conspiratorial thriller. From there they moved on to 2016’s Captain America: Civil War, which brought the title character into conflict with Iron Man and introduced the Black Panther. The directors’ skill for coordinating such an extensive cast got them tapped to make Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019), a two-part mega-epic that was shot simultaneously and features just about anyone who has ever showed up in a Marvel film. I talked with the Russos about the way they planned the grand story arcs for the series, the pressure of managing so many performers, and whether large-scale “event” movies will define the theatrical experience going forward. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

David Sims: You joined Marvel for the first time with Captain America: The Winter Soldier. When you came aboard, how much of the broader story arc was already on the map?

Anthony Russo: We entered the universe right before The Avengers came out [in 2012]. So [the Marvel movies were] working well enough for the studio to want to make a second Captain America movie, but the environment we came into was Kevin Feige trying to keep things fresh and surprising. Marvel had conceived of perhaps doing a Captain America movie as a political thriller, but it was a tentative concept. Our big thing to figure out was, how do we modernize the character and toughen him up? He can’t possibly be the same human being he was in World War II as he is 70 years later, with none of his old friends around him.

Sims: This is ludicrous to say, because it’s a very big movie, but Winter Soldier was so much smaller than Endgame because you’re dealing with one character’s arc rather than 20. That early on, were you thinking about the four more movies you wanted to do with this character?

Joe Russo: No. You try to imbue the film with the richest storytelling that you can because, if you do that, there’s always somewhere to go. There’s some interesting corner you’ve painted yourself into that will provide dramatic propulsion moving forward. If that movie doesn’t work, you’re not making another one.

Sims: Did you immediately move on to Captain America: Civil War? Was that where the bigger arcs come in?

Joe: We were working on it almost overlapping with Winter Soldier.

Anthony: Marvel is very disciplined in its process. They did not invite us to do another Captain America movie until they had seen the edit for Winter Soldier.

Joe: And they also didn’t want us to take our focus away from that [first] movie. Feige is very good about doing one movie at a time. As soon as you hand the movie in, there’s a phone call, and literally while we’re working on press for Winter Soldier, we’re also dreaming up ideas for Civil War.

Sims: Endgame is all about these endings that feel so natural for the characters. Were you trying to think of an ending for Captain America at that earlier point?

Anthony: We wanted to go right to the heart of what we care about in these movies: the relationships between these characters. Once we came out of the edit of Civil War, we realized that we’d succeeded in divorcing the Avengers, destroying the relationship between Tony Stark and Steve Rogers. We’ve set the table for Thanos; we’re ready for him.

Sims: Was [setting the table for Thanos] totally intentional, or was it born out of the idea of Tony and Steve’s conflict?

Anthony: It was really just us running at the conflict. How do we tell the most wrenching family drama we can?

Sims: When you were on set for Infinity War and Endgame, you had all these arcs to manage at once. How do you separate the signal from the noise for the actors?

Joe: You have to have a very cohesive plan. You’re making thousands of decisions a day. There are multiple filming units, there’s a whole visual-effects team, we have actors coming to us, saying, “I wouldn’t say it this way, I’d say it that way.” Our job is to collect all this information and be the arbiters of taste and provide focus for the entire process. You have to leave room for everyone else to be empowered and assist in making creative decisions.

Sims: Infinity War has so much action and wrenching chaos. Endgame is a lot slower, more deliberate on the character stuff, and I appreciate that viewers got the chance to slow things down and sit with the team for a while. Is there a scene that exemplifies that new approach that you particularly enjoyed doing?

Anthony: The scene that Joe was in, Cap’s counseling session [with other survivors of Thanos’s decimation].

Sims: A scene about which a studio would immediately ask, “Do we need this? Can this go?”

Anthony: You are very right [Laughs]. But it was very important to us! If you have a story point where you kill half of all living things, you have to move beyond the experience of the Avengers. To have an everyman in the story at that moment, and see Cap in a sensitive moment that spoke to his history as a character and the reality he’s living in now—that was an important thing for us.

Sims: For 11 years, these movies have been stand-alones that tell their own stories, but they’ve all been aimed toward Endgame. Do you think Marvel will continue that storytelling style, or will things get more diffuse now that you’ve done the big conclusion where everyone’s together?

Joe: You have to find a new path forward. That was always our [pitch], which is why I think they allowed us to make these really disruptive choices. You can’t keep giving people chocolate ice cream.

Sims: You have to blow up S.H.I.E.L.D. immediately after giving people S.H.I.E.L.D, in The Winter Soldier.

Joe: Exactly. So I think [Marvel has] to find a new path forward in this next mega-story they’re going to tell, and I think they’re going to make some very different and surprising choices. The thing we’re most proud of is how diverse the Marvel universe will be, moving forward. The first gay hero is coming, characters of different nationalities are going to be introduced—it’s going to pull the entire world into the story.

Sims: Do you have to get to the level of success that Marvel is at now to make those riskier choices that a studio might balk at earlier on in the process? In 2008, if Feige had [proposed] an African hero, a gay superhero, maybe a studio would have wavered. Is that how Hollywood always has to work—that you build up capital to spend it on “riskier” stuff?

Anthony: When we were in the edit room on The Winter Soldier, I remember Kevin walking in one day and putting a hand on us and saying, “Can you believe that we’re getting away with making a political thriller as a superhero movie?” Because of the success of the series, we’re all empowered to make decisions that you may not have been able to before. There’s a cycle happening there, because when you make those choices, it surprises audiences worldwide, if you tell the stories well. You’re being very noisy as a storyteller, and that feeds the beast even more.

Joe: Black Panther was perhaps one of the more significant cultural events in movie history. That only emboldens the studio to keep moving forward. You’d hope that decisions would be made irrespective of the financials, but ultimately it is called show business, and things are driven by dollars and cents. What’s great about audiences today is that voices can be heard, and people can collectively ask for things from their storytellers and receive them.

Sims: I know you guys worked with Steven Soderbergh when you were coming up in the industry. I talked to him when his Netflix movie High Flying Bird came out about how we both perceive this widening gap—there are the little movies, there are the big movies, and there are fewer of the middle-sized movies like rom-coms and dramas. Is there ever going to be space for that again?

Joe: Here’s where it’s all headed, and I think social media was the driver for all of this: There’s a very clear metric between generating conversation and box-office revenue. With all of the quality content you can get in your home and given that [streaming companies are] only going to increase what they’re spending on that content, getting people out of the house requires a special experience. That’s why movies are becoming more event-sized. Marvel is creating this emotional connection with its audience—it has done so over a decade, and there’s emotional capital invested. This generation is more invested in serialized storytelling than they are in two-hour narratives.

Sims: Which is what you both started out doing.

Joe: We’re children of the ’70s and ’80s, the golden era of auteur filmmaking. We love it, but at some point the impressionists have to step aside, and the next group of artists has to show up and paint in a different way. I think this generation of viewers is going to change the way that we perceive narrative because audiences are so facile in the way they consume content. Whether it be on Twitter in 30 seconds, on YouTube in five minutes, on Netflix, at the theater, they all value different experiences, but they value a connection and, above all, a conversation. That’s why I think movies in the middle have sort of disappeared, because they don’t drive conversation the same way that event movies do, and they don’t drive it on a global scale the way event movies do.

Sims: Do you want to keep working on this global scale? Or do you want to trend back to a smaller thing?

Anthony: Look, our next movie is a smaller thing: We’re going to make a movie with Tom Holland based on a book called Cherry. We’ve made movies for as little money as you can make a movie for, and for as much money as you can possibly make a movie for. We’ve done television, comedy, drama, cable, network—we love the entire variety of what you can do. By changing the format, you change the creative possibilities for what you can do. But we definitely have a taste for, and a skill set for, these big event films, so I know we’ll return to them at some point.



LOS ANGELES—It is 8 p.m. on a soft spring Saturday and the oldest restaurant in Hollywood is packed to the gills. Tattooed hipsters in black jeans and miniskirts share the two bustling dining rooms with oldsters in cashmere V-necks, loafers, and Ferragamo pumps; jazzy standards pulse through the sound system at a volume neither too loud nor too soft; and the glow from the ancient wood-burning cast-iron grill suffuses the scene.

In this sprawling, polyglot culinary capital, where the cuisine ranges across the alphabet, from Armenian to Yemeni, the Musso & Frank Grill, which turns 100 years old in September, has not only endured but also prevailed, with a menu that still features such antique dishes as Welsh rarebit, chicken pot pie, grilled lamb kidneys, and calf’s liver with onions, not to mention its spine-tingling, stirred-not-shaken martinis—55,272 of them served last year alone.

Los Angeles’s food scene has never been hotter. The Michelin Guide recently announced plans to resume reviewing restaurants here after a nine-year hiatus occasioned by the feeling that the city’s restaurants weren’t quite up to snuff? The Los Angeles Times has just relaunched a stand-alone food section to explore the city’s burgeoning restaurant culture each Thursday? The New York Times has dispatched its first-ever California food critic, Tejal Rao, to sample the region’s bounty?

None of that much matters at Musso’s, whose mahogany booths and original hat stands would feel instantly familiar to Charlie Chaplin, F. Scott Fitzgerald, William Faulkner, Raymond Chandler, Orson Welles, Lauren Bacall, Elizabeth Taylor, Dorothy Parker, Alfred Hitchcock, or any of the dozens of others who made it one of the places to eat in Hollywood’s golden age—plus a raft of more recent regulars, including Gore Vidal, Keith Richards, and Quentin Tarantino, who features the restaurant in his forthcoming film, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Over the years, Musso’s has also made cameo appearances in many movies and television shows; it doubled as the New York theater hangout Sardi’s in Mad Men, for instance, and Kerry Washington ate there in an episode of Scandal.

Most of Musso’s contemporaries among the hot spots of old Los Angeles are long gone, including the Brown Derby (the inventor of the Cobb salad), Chasen’s (supposedly the birthplace of the Shirley Temple), and the Cock’n Bull (the cradle of the Moscow mule).

Yet Musso’s is thriving, and was recently featured favorably in one of Rao’s first reviews; she praised its “impossibly charming dining room,” and called the cocktails and steaks “unfailing” and the wedge salads “dignified.” By most accounts, the food—which was slipping a decade and more ago—is better than ever, and the restaurant has posted consistent double-digit revenue growth in recent years, according to Mark Echeverria, the chief operating officer in the fourth generation of family ownership.

Why? “I think Musso’s is in a time warp that appeals to our occasionally wanting to just strip away the new, the shiny, and the uncertain to simply eat and relax,” Barbara Fairchild, the former editor of Bon Appétit and a longtime Angeleno, wrote me in a recent email. “You don’t come to Musso’s to prove a point. You just come to enjoy yourself.”

As Fairchild also pointed out, “L.A. is an explosion of flavor right now, and our restaurant scene is booming, the best, most diverse in the country,” and diners have nearly infinite options. So Musso’s—a restaurant so old that its “new room,” the overflow dining area and bar, dates to 1955—may be trading on nostalgia in a city “that a lot of people stereotypically think of as the Capital of the Ephemeral,” she said.

But the restaurant is trading on more than that, too. Its real secret is its constancy. It makes no nod to nouvelle cuisine or farm-to-table provenance (no waiter will ever tell you the name of your lamb or the farmer who raised it). But because Musso’s is in California, the avocados are always ripe, the tomatoes juicy, the lettuce fresh, and the vibe laid-back. The waiters—all men, in crisp, red waist-length jackets with black lapels—are professional and polished, and most of them have a tenure of many years, if not decades. Ruben Rueda, a legendary bartender who worked at the restaurant for 52 years beginning as a busboy and who used to drive Charles Bukowski home if the writer was drunk, died just last month.

The bartenders serve up Manhattans, sidecars, old-fashioneds, and those trademark martinis, which come in a frosty three-ounce glass (so the gin or vodka stays cold) with a carafe containing the second pour—the “dividend”—nestled in a miniature hammered, stainless ice bucket brought to your table. As for food, the basics are best, such as the daily specials, including short ribs and sauerbraten.

Sean Daniel, a veteran movie producer and studio production chief, first went to Musso’s as a young junior executive at Universal Studios some 40 years ago. “When I got an expense account, I literally was like, ‘I’ve always wanted to eat at Musso & Frank. I’ve never been able to afford it. That’s where I’m going,’” he recalls. “And I have to say, I think that was a ritual for many people.” Daniel still goes to the restaurant each September for an annual birthday lunch for his friend Frank Marshall, a producer, where the attendees include the director Bob Zemeckis and other old pals.

Musso’s future was not always certain. As its location on Hollywood Boulevard grew steadily seedier in the 1970s, ’80s, and early ’90s, it suffered along with the neighborhood. Twenty years ago, the main dining room could be a tomb on Saturday nights and reservations were never a problem. Finding a vegetarian dish wasn’t impossible, but it wasn’t easy either. I once shared a meal with Carole King in which she had to content herself with one bowl of stewed tomatoes and another of sautéed spinach. An aging second generation of management had cut corners and let quality slide, and as the Great Recession of 2008 loomed, the restaurant risked going under.

That’s where Echeverria, 39, enters the story. He is a great-grandson of John Mosso (no relation to the restaurant’s namesake), who with a partner, Joseph Carissimi, bought the place in 1927 from its first owners, Frank Toulet and Joseph Musso (the original name was Frank’s François Café). Together, Mosso and Carissimi presided over Musso’s glory days, even as newer, swankier places such as Romanoff’s in Beverly Hills competed for celebrity customers in the 1940s and ’50s. In 2009, with no third-generation family members involved in active day-to-day management, the Mosso heirs bought out the Carrisimi family and installed Echeverria, who had run fly-fishing lodges in Alaska and worked as an operations manager at a ski resort in Lake Tahoe during the winters, as chief financial officer and chief operating officer.

“I had some of the business operational experience that they were looking for,” he told me, “and they felt I had a value to bring.” Echeverria’s first goal was “to bring the quality of food and service back up to the standard of what our community expected from us,” all without changing anything too much. The restaurant’s first executive chef, Jean Rue—who held the job for 53 years—was French-trained, but his menu reflected the Continental melting pot that was early Hollywood, so there were classic French dishes, but also Italian specialties, Hungarian goulash, and Wiener schnitzel. “The menu started becoming this thing that everyone could relate to,” Echeverria said, and he was determined to carry on that tradition. He hired J. P. Amateau, a graduate of the Culinary Institute of America, as executive chef. As it happened, Amateau had a personal connection to Musso’s. His father, Rod Amateau, was Humphrey Bogart’s stunt double and later a director of television programs such as The Dukes of Hazzard, and a young J. P. often went with his father to savor the restaurant’s signature flannel cakes—large, thin, sugarless pancakes—at the grill counter.

In celebration of the centennial, Echeverria is opening three private dining rooms in a former retail space adjoining the barroom. But the cold-eyed key to Musso’s survival is that the restaurant’s owners are also its landlords (they’ve owned the building for decades), with a large valet parking lot in the rear so patrons can drop their car with ease and avoid the street scene on Hollywood Boulevard, which can still sometimes be as tawdry and vivid as anything Nathanael West described in The Day of the Locust.

By the end of my meal on that recent Saturday, at 9:50 p.m., there was still not an empty seat in the main dining room, where the V-shaped copper wall sconces cast a gentle light over the linen-covered tables and glinting glassware, and the murmur of satisfied eaters—first-timers and regulars alike—was the sound of people just happy to be in a place that still does what it does so well.



This article contains spoilers for Game of Thrones Season 8, Episode 3. 

In pop culture, magic’s not so special. Look to Avengers: Endgame for the latest example of a typical take on the supernatural, in which heroes hurl lightning as easily as they comb their hair. It looks like magic, but is it really? In Marvel, the supernatural is a matter of science—Tony Stark and Dr. Strange had to study for their powers—as it often is in America’s favorite onscreen franchises. While there’s no talk of quantum realms or Pym particles in Harry Potter or Star Wars, wizardry and the Force convey a similar feeling of spell-casting as tech. Powers might be harder to come by than a smartphone is, but once obtained, they’re about as dependable to use.

As it’s often been conceived in our own world, though, magic is unpredictable—and more associated with religion than science. Verifying the miracles of saints requires hazy historical piecework by the Catholic Church. Summoning circles are thought to open unpredictable gateways to other worlds, as captured in the refrain of the recent meme about such magic: Hope this works. Belief in the beyond can encourage terrible deeds: human sacrifices to ensure a harvest, persecution of outsiders for a metaphysical notion of purity. When a plea to the supernatural appears to work out, it feels spooky. When it doesn’t, that’s just life.

Part of the genius of George R. R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire universe is that it pushes that mundane—and truly mysterious—conception of magic just one or two degrees further into the realm of fantasy. Westeros, at the beginning of the saga, was an unenchanted land. Stories of dragons and witches were, as in our own world, just stories. As monsters encroached over the course of the series, so too did spell-casting, shape-shifting, and fortune-telling. But such magic still was janky, dangerous, and rare.

Melisandre, the red-haired priestess of the Lord of Light, embodied this theme. She birthed smoke monsters and raised the dead, but she also sacrificed children to no apparent gain and saw visions of dubious utility. Backing Stannis Baratheon as the savior of the realm, she realized too late, was a misreading. Restoring Jon Snow to life, she said before she attempted it, was almost surely impossible. Hers was magic that often had to apologize for itself.

So it was that in the latest episode, “The Long Night,” Melisandre arrived from exile seeming more embarrassed than omnipotent. “There’s no need to execute me, Ser Davos,” she announced. “I’ll be dead before the dawn.” Though the episode amounted to an hour-and-a-half rotation between near-defeat and improbable victories for humankind, the Lord of Light continued to play a sketchy, unreliable role. Melisandre made dramatic contributions, but she did not clearly turn the fight.

As the first form to emerge from the dark woods north of Winterfell, Melisandre entered with style, riding up to the army and then reciting a prayer that set the Dothraki swords ablaze. After so much ominous buildup about the odds they faced, Daenerys’s forces finally seemed to have the weaponry to defeat the dead. But then the Dothraki charged into the dark night and quickly, quietly, had their flames—and lives—extinguished by the wights, who were still invisible to viewers. So much for deus ex Melisandre.

Later, when Grey Worm’s plans to ignite the moat of flame outside the fortress walls met a hiccup in the form of an evil blizzard, Melisandre again stepped in with her mystic kerosene. But as with someone trying to strike tinder on a windy day, ignition proved difficult. Melisandre repeated her incantation with greater and greater dismay and desperation, and it looked like her god had forsaken her. Then, almost too late, poof. The firewall slowed down the dead, but it did not stop them.

Melisandre’s final intervention was subtler. Inside the Winterfell keep, Arya encountered the Red Woman for the first time since Season 3, when the young girl confronted the centuries-old woman about kidnapping Gendry. Back then, Melisandre made a prophecy: Arya would eventually shut eyes of brown, blue, and green forever. If that prediction seems to be coming true, it also has the air of a daytime-TV medium giving a cold reading. Melisandre met a vengeful little girl traveling with a band of warriors and guessed that she’d go on to kill many people; not that far-fetched, really.

As fans try to guess who the green-eyed victim might be—the late Littlefinger or the living Cersei? —it’s important to remember that Melisandre’s divination has had little story effect. It’s just info to interpret. But there did appear to be one concrete outcome of the prophecy: inspiring Arya to kill the Night King, he of blue eyes. More directly, Melisandre gave the Stark warrior a pep talk by invoking the same aphorism Arya’s sword-fighting teacher, Syrio Forel, used: “What do we say to the god of death? Not today.” She also said that Beric Dondarrion, who had just been killed while rescuing Arya, had previously been kept alive by the fire god for a great reason. Arya then ran off with purpose, and was next seen delivering the surprise shiv to the Night King.

So: Some temporary roadblocks to the villains, and one motivational speech, are what the Lord of Light’s clear contributions amounted to in the final battle between the living and the dead. These acts were apparently enough for Melisandre to believe she had fulfilled her destiny after hundreds of years of living. As the sun rose, she removed her mystical necklace—which had been maintaining the illusion of her as a young woman—and disintegrated into dust.

Perhaps the episode ended on the image of this demise to convey the deeper shift that happens with Melisandre out of the picture. She and Dondarrion all along evangelized for an austere belief system, one with just a god of life and a god of death. This religion stood in contrast to the mainstream Westeros faith of “The Seven,” which has the recognizably humanlike deities of the Father, the Mother, the Maiden, the Crone, the Warrior, the Smith, and the Stranger. Its practitioners, including the Sparrows who took over King’s Landing in Season 6, do not appear to use magic. It’s the religion of civilization: fractured, yet interdependent.

Now, with the Night King dispatched, the world may begin to return to a less enchanted state, which is, oddly, a more complex one. Magic isn’t completely gone; dragons and direwolves live, Arya can change faces, and Maester Qyburn’s reanimated Mountain guards Cersei. But it seems likely that overt supernatural influence won’t be able to save the show’s heroes anymore, not that it could be relied upon to do so in the first place. If those heroes’ prayers are answered, it should, more than even before, feel like a miracle.



This article contains spoilers throughout Season 1 of Ramy.

Hulu’s new series Ramy depicts a fictionalized version of the life of its star and co-creator, Ramy Youssef (named Ramy Hassan on the show), a Millennial Egyptian American from a robust North Jersey Muslim community. Along with the co-creators Ari Katcher and Ryan Welch, Youssef explores the complexities of being a religious man from an immigrant family with wry humor and a dash of surrealism.

The series swings from topic to topic with ease: the ennui of living at home as a young adult; the misguided ways first-generation kids romanticize their family’s homelands; the difficulty of coming of age post-9/11. Also dispersed throughout the season are depictions of Ramy’s various relationships with women, both platonic and romantic, as he seeks a partner. In these scenes, the show reveals a more myopic perspective through its disparate treatment of Muslim women, characters often boxed into stereotypes with no recourse to develop as fully realized individuals.

In the pilot episode, written by the trio of creators, Ramy goes on a first date with a Muslim woman named Nour (Dina Shihabi), courtesy of his mother’s machinations. Despite his low expectations, the date goes well, with the pair making plans to see each other again. Those arrangements, however, are upended by an intimate encounter gone comically wrong, when Ramy is taken aback by the lustful forthrightness of the woman he was initially charmed by. Incensed by his hesitation, Nour pointedly calls out what she considers the limited capacity Ramy expects her to occupy: “I’m in this little Muslim box—I’m supposed to be the wife or the mother of your kids,” she says. “But I’m not supposed to come.”

Her frustration is valid. Implicit in Ramy and Nour’s interaction is the idea that Ramy’s reservations are not tied to a commitment to celibacy, but rather to his idea that sexual liberation (and impropriety) is reserved only for white women. Ramy’s experiences with Muslim women in the United States and Egypt prevent him from seeing them as autonomous individuals who have romantic and sexual agency. In rebuffing his mother’s initial suggestion that he find a partner at the mosque, he dismissively replies, “You can’t just walk up to a Muslim girl and like, start spitting game or something. What am I supposed to say? Like, ‘Hey, can I get your father’s number?’”

It’s an especially stark juxtaposition to an earlier conversation he has with a Jewish American woman named Chloe (played by PEN15’s Anna Konkle). Ramy admits trying to obfuscate his adherence to Islam in his romantic endeavors, telling her, “I’ve met girls who seem open-minded and then they’re not. Maybe you’d be into the idea of me being culturally different, but hate that I actually believe in God.” The empathy that he seeks from his non-Muslim love interests is the exact understanding that he denies his female Muslim counterparts.

As the series unfolds, Ramy freely processes his relationships with women while navigating the anxieties generated by his religious sins. In a scenario where he meets another potential partner, for example, Ramy spends the night with the woman during the twilight hours before the adhan call to prayer that kicks off the holy month of Ramadan. The rest of the episode is spent unpacking his guilt for such incidents as the month progresses, and examining the motivations behind his behavior. Yet the frame of reference for Ramy’s female Muslim characters is rather limiting, one that denies the significant power they hold within their own faith systems. And though scenes like the one with Nour are valuable because Youssef smartly recognizes the stereotypes applied to Muslim women and confronts them on the show, absent any narrative progress, these moments merely become a distancing device.

While Ramy’s family grants him the space to reconcile the aimless indulgence of young adulthood with his piety, his sister Dena (May Calamawy) struggles to establish her independence. In a capsule episode written by Bridget Bedard (Transparent, Mad Men), Dena fights to have the same free rein of life that’s afforded to her brother. Much of this double standard is realized on-screen by comparing Ramy’s and Dena’s contrasting performances of sexuality, with Dena navigating the shame, policing, and fetishization that come with attempting to make the same choices as Ramy. As a result, she’s far more stunted in the area.

For instance, in a real-life fantasy turned nightmare, Dena is asked by her romantic interest to come up with sex positions. She hesitates, then blurts out, “Whatever, I’m cool with like, any of them,” conjuring the false confidence of a pubescent boy bragging on a school bus. The episode’s rendering of her limited exposure to the basics of sex seems a bit unfeasible: Chastity and modesty aren’t synonymous terms. And there’s little reason she’d be oblivious to any sex positions—despite her virginity—given the ubiquity of popular culture and social experiences.

Moreover, the bulk of the dialogue within the episode is framed around Dena’s frustrations with her restricted life. The role is brilliantly performed by Calamawy, who imbues the character with a delicate balance of brashness and vulnerability. But the portrayal still leaves viewers with very little understanding of who Dena is beyond an outspoken personality exasperated by the barriers she keeps running into. Compared, for instance, with the show’s depiction of Ramy’s male cousin Shadi (Shadi Alfons)—a character introduced as a boorish party animal, but later fleshed out as a complex and problematic individual grappling with the trauma of the 2011 Egyptian revolution—Dena’s character development is limited to the perceived albatross of her sexuality.

This is a pattern that continues as the series proceeds. Youssef dedicates an episode to Ramy’s mother, Maysa (Hiam Abbass), in which she’s portrayed as a once-vibrant, worldly woman now reduced to an ignored and undesired housewife. Salma (Poorna Jagannathan), a mother at the mosque with whom Ramy has an extended affair, is trapped in a loveless marriage with an absent husband, yet is still expected to be a dutiful Muslim wife. Even Ramy’s ultimate romantic connection at the end of the season—with the first Muslim woman he takes seriously (Rosaline Elbay)—hinges on him “liberating” her from the restrictive dichotomy he feels she is bound to as a divorcée: consistently dealing with men who either, in her words, “want to marry a virgin or have sex on the first date.”

The irony is that while Ramy puts Muslim women in a box, he similarly constrains himself as he vies for the attention of white women. He transforms into the most milquetoast, accessible, and understandable versions of his religious self for their comfort, to little avail. In a discussion with Elbay’s character in the final episode, Ramy recalls a conversation where he tells a non-Muslim woman he’s pursuing, “Child’s pose and prayer are the same position … we’re almost doing the same thing.” His tone in retelling the story is self-mocking, and it seems to be tinged with an awareness of the cost of his frequent overcompensation.

The illustrations of the majority of the Muslim women in Ramy’s life are focused on all the things they seemingly can’t do. These representations are divorced from reality; Muslim women are indeed varied and complicated, but portraying them as largely absent of agency, or somehow wholly separate from the temptations or crises that Ramy himself navigates, excludes them from the modern Millennial existence in a way that rings false. The lives of Muslim women aren’t exclusively dominated by forlorn conversations about potential suitors and their proclivities; women are mobilizing and advocating for their people in the face of rising oppression, breaking barriers in sports and modeling, and engaging in their day-to-day lives on their own terms. They are defining their identities in a world often committed to making them feel that they should be in despair. Ramy executes its male narratives with wit and precision. It’s unfortunate that, so far, the show fails to demonstrate that Muslim women’s stories can be more than a sympathetic canvas of unfulfilled dreams.



On the evening of November 6, 2018, Beto O’Rourke appeared before a large crowd in El Paso, Texas, to concede his senatorial race to the Republican incumbent, Ted Cruz. “I’m so fucking proud of you guys,” O’Rourke would tell that crowd, as it roared in response—a line that would promptly go viral. Before he took the stage, though, O’Rourke huddled in a fluorescent-lit hallway with his wife, Amy, and a small collection of the staffers who had helped the Democrat come surprisingly close to unseating Cruz. “I just feel very, very, very lucky,” O’Rourke said, as they gathered in their circle, “and I love you guys more than you’ll ever know. And I know I was a giant asshole to be around sometimes, and you all never allowed my shortcomings to get in the way of running the best campaign this state has ever seen.”

The huddle makes for one of the final scenes in Running With Beto, the diaristic account of O’Rourke’s senatorial bid that premiered at South by Southwest earlier this year and airs on HBO today. There is very little about the documentary that comes as a surprise—this particular story’s ending was decided that evening in early November—but here is one: The line about being a giant asshole is an exaggeration that also … kind of tracks. The central figure of Running With Beto presents, overall, as a guy who can get snippy with people when he’s stressed, or when he’s weary, or when he’s hangry. The intimacy is part of the sales pitch. Running With Beto begins with its subject pumping gas on a Facebook livestream, and this scene doubles as a declaration of intent: Beto’s candidacy is a lesson in what happens when the politics of authenticity collides with the tools—smartphones, Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat—that allow for new kinds of access to politicians. O’Rourke is often trailed by Chris Evans (not that one), his campaign communications manager, who diligently streams the candidate’s every movement via a smartphone anchored to a portable tripod. Beto went viral—his run for statewide office became a national media event—in part because of these efforts. Call it gadgetprop.

Running With Beto was co–executive-produced by Jon Favreau, Jon Lovett, and Tommy Vietor (otherwise known as “the Pod Save America guys”); it often has the feel of an infomercial whose miracle product is a lanky resident of El Paso. This, too, is unsurprising. What is striking, though, is the low-stakes nature of the miracle: But wait! There’s more! the film keeps insisting—and the “more” here involves Beto, in his kitchen, eating some toast. Running With Beto’s director, David Modigliani, reportedly gathered 700 hours of footage to create the roughly 90-minute film, and it would have been easy to make the whole thing a classic hagiography. Instead, the final edit includes scenes of Beto’s family lamenting his run (“It’s definitely difficult for them,” Amy O’Rourke says of the campaign’s effect on their kids; “I’m ready for it to be over,” their son agrees later on). It includes shots of the candidate himself doing the same (“They’re having to live their lives without their dad being around,” he tells the camera). It also includes footage of Beto berating a staffer for her handling of the press; and chomping on anonymously wrapped food while driving his car down an equally anonymous interstate; and sweating profusely through his shirts.

Whether those moments are indicative of simple “transparency” or of a more manufactured strain of authenticity, they are unquestionably consonant with the logic of the campaign itself. “I think what we’re selling with him is just genuineness,” David Wysong, O’Rourke’s campaign chief, says near the outset of the film. He does not seem to recognize—or at least to acknowledge—the paradox lurking in the declaration.

Running With Beto follows in the tradition of many recent political documentaries—Weiner, Mitt, Knock Down the House—but one of its most direct antecedents is The War Room, the now classic behind-the-scenes look at the running of Bill Clinton’s 1992 presidential campaign. Shot, by the documentarians Chris Hegedus and D. A. Pennebaker, in a verité style—and foregoing talking-head interviews in favor of a voraciously roving camera—The War Room studiously de-romanticizes the battles that are waged on the campaign trail. (Many of its scenes feature its central subjects, James Carville and George Stephanopoulos, simply looking bored. At one point, they’re shown eating popcorn out of large coffee filters that have been repurposed as bowls.) “What you realize,” as Roger Ebert put it in a 1994 review, “watching Carville and Stephanopoulos move between grand strategy and damage control, is that they are good at their jobs, and probably as honest as was possible under the circumstances. Certainly their decision to allow access by documentarians shows a willingness to be seen, warts and all.”

The War Room offers an inside look at how political charisma was industrialized for the particular affordances of the early 1990s in America; Running With Beto, in its way, does the same for its moment. The former was revolutionary in the behind-the-scenes access it both attained and provided: the wizards behind the curtain, under-slept and over-caffeinated, cannily directing the performances on the stage. Running With Beto, on the other hand, is revealing in its recognition that, at this point, there aren’t many scenes left to go behind at all. Center stage, backstage: The lines between them blur. And so do the lines between the candidate as a carefully calibrated performance and the candidate as a person.

There was once a time when politicians were distant figures who derived their power in part from their ability to argue that they were, in ways both measurable and ineffable, different from everyone else. Running With Beto—the with is the key word there—flips the proposition. The film frames the politician in question not as above the public, but rather as existing among them: If celebrity now involves a kind of ubiquity, the same is true in politics. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, making Instant Pot mac and cheese and discovering garbage disposals. Elizabeth Warren, drinking a bottle of beer with her husband, Bruce. Beto, now a presidential candidate, getting a dental cleaning and a haircut.

Running With Beto suggests the power of that branded authenticity; it also suggests its severe limitations. The documentary about the making of a political celebrity is also, at this point, a story about the unmaking of one: It airs on HBO during a moment of distinct Beto fatigue. Those soul-searching road trips. That regrettable Vanity Fair spread. That cringe-inducing campaign-launch video. That sparsely watched CNN town hall. The very legitimate criticism that Beto’s signature policy seems to be celebrity itself. Running With Beto ends on an insistently hopeful note: O’Rourke lost to Cruz, yes, but his campaign itself, the suggestion goes, energized progressive Texans for future fights. And his losing campaign launched, effectively, a presidential run. Tom Petty’s “Runnin’ Down a Dream” plays as the credits roll, and just like David Wysong’s discussion of “selling genuineness,” there is nothing ironic about the selection. It’s authenticity treated as a means. But to what end?



This article contains spoilers for the Season 3 premiere of The Bold Type.
The first time that The Bold Type’s Jane Sloan (Katie Stevens) meets her soon-to-be boss in the show’s Season 3 premiere, their encounter is a literal wreck. On the Freeform dramedy, which follows the writer and two friends working at the Cosmopolitan-inspired Scarlet magazine, Jane opens her cab door outside the office and hits a passing cyclist: the publication’s incoming digital editor, Patrick Duchand (Peter Vack). Jane is outraged that Patrick hadn’t been riding in the bike lane—and that’s before she learns his identity. Afterward, she’s incensed that he, or any man, would be brought in to lead the women’s magazine.
Like the publication that ties them together, the three young women at the show’s core experienced a series of dramatic shifts prior to Patrick’s arrival. By the end of The Bold Type’s second season, the social-media director Kat Edison (Aisha Dee) more fully embraced her black queer identity and broke up with her girlfriend, the photographer Adena (Nikohl Boosheri). The fashion assistant Sutton Brady (Meghann Fahy) found her footing in her new gig and publicly revealed her long-running relationship with the handsome board member Richard Hunter (Sam Page). Most devastatingly, Jane learned that she has the same BRCA gene mutation as her mother, who died of breast cancer.Scarlet’s editor, the glamorous Jacqueline Carlyle (Melora Hardin), wrote an article advocating for the Scarlet board to reconsider restrictive health-insurance policies that would keep employees like Jane from being able to afford egg freezing and other prohibitively expensive reproductive procedures. The board, unsurprisingly composed of men, bristled at her public critique; by the season’s end, the executives were reviewing possible replacements for Jacqueline. Now, at the outset of Season 3, Patrick’s introduction is an intriguing, and conflict-filled, new direction for a show loosely based on the life of the famed Cosmopolitan editor Joanna Coles.

Carlyle, the Coles-inspired character, remains on staff at Scarlet in a print-specific role in Season 3, but the slights she suffers because of Patrick’s hiring will likely seem familiar to The Bold Type’s largely female fan base. Through Patrick’s character, the show deftly elucidates any number of indignities that women experience in the workplace: ageism, insensitivity to personal issues, garden-variety paternalism.
As a villain, Patrick is more gnat than tyrant. He is overly familiar, often using his own queerness to either cozy up to Kat or suggest that he intrinsically understands women—and is therefore qualified to lead Scarlet. He simply grates. Given much of the increased public dialogue about workplace discrimination and harassment, it would have been natural for The Bold Type to introduce a more obviously evil character—a man who held openly misogynistic views, or who’d harmed women in easily legible ways. (At one point, Jane believes this to be true of Patrick, but the show quickly complicates her assumption with a surprising detail from his past.)

But the writers’ choice to instead depict more nebulous forms of gendered undermining is a smart, if occasionally cringe-inducing, narrative choice. In its third season, as in its solid first and stellar second installments, The Bold Type addresses the issues facing young women not by dramatizing conflict beyond reasonable bounds, but by following its leads with a refreshing attention to the social forces that affect each part of their lives.

As with any Hollywood workplace rendering, though, the show has some moments of dubious authenticity. As a writer—which is to say, a particularly invested party—it’s been consistently hard for me to not at least giggle at the show’s depictions of editorial processes. (And sure, I was tickled by the quick shot of a profile of “Patrick Duchand, Digital Wunderkind” on a mock-up of The Atlantic.) On The Bold Type, every story is supposedly urgent, but no one ever seems to be in a rush to write; social media is allegedly important, but the team director doesn’t appear to know how to schedule tweets. The series tackles the interior lives of its leads with impressive realism, but stretches the truth most obviously when it comes to its depictions of their jobs as purveyors of fact. (I will admit, though, that perhaps a small portion of my incredulity might stem from jealousy—what I wouldn’t give for Jane’s writing schedule, which appears to be “whenever inspiration strikes.”)
It’s a television show, of course, so these are forgivable lapses—the Freeform program’s most natural predecessor, Sex and the City, was hardly known for its journalistic rigor. And The Bold Type more than makes up for these retouches with its clear investment in the characters who lead Scarlet. Though Patrick’s addition to the show’s glossy ecosystem sets the new season up for its biggest shifts, he’s not the only queer male character who gets substantial screen time: Sutton grows closer to her boss, Oliver (Stephen Conrad Moore), after noticing a lapse in his attention at the office and inadvertently learning some backstory about his life. It’s a welcome fleshing out of Oliver’s character; though clearly talented and exacting in his management of Sutton, he’d previously been one of the less realized figures.

The main women’s relationships all progress, too, with Kat’s being perhaps the most instructive for young women navigating love and loss alongside the pressures of hyper-connectivity. Jane’s onetime fling, the writer Ryan, appears at length, too (the friends all call him “Pinstripe,” after the Scarlet-affiliated publication where he worked when he met Jane). In one charmingly risqué scene, Sutton accidentally sees him leaving Jane’s room naked post-coitus. The friends then proceed to joke, with no shortage of admiring laughter, about “Pinstripe’s peen-stripe,” a Carrie Bradshaw–ian line so corny, it’s endearing. Thankfully, The Bold Type, with its earnest story lines and thoughtful touches, remains a delight to watch.



Imagine a Twilight Zone episode that goes something like this: An individual regularly takes to the internet in the hopes of making himself heard, railing against everything from the “hatefulness” of Democrats to the degradation of modern society. All he wants is an audience. But then the hapless individual complains on Twitter that the new CBS All Access reboot of The Twilight Zone is yet another beloved cultural property that’s been ruined by leftist cultural warriors. Finally, his wish has come true: He goes viral, and is subsequently roasted by journalists and internet celebrities and comedians with millions of followers. He’s dragged so mercilessly, in fact, that the individual eventually has to set his profile to private—depriving himself of the one outlet he had for communicating with the world.

Versions of this scenario did actually happen recently, as disgruntled viewers responding to new episodes of The Twilight Zone found themselves given short shrift for expressing dismay that the update, produced by Jordan Peele and Simon Kinberg, is too “political.” The Twilight Zone, of course, has always had something to say about the state of the world—not since the time of Jesus himself have center-left parables with clear moral lessons been so efficiently disseminated. Rod Serling devised the concept for the show precisely because 1950s network producers were so skittish about overt political messages in the wake of McCarthyism. On television in 1956, Serling later wrote in his book Patterns, “to say a single thing germane to the current political scene was absolutely prohibited.”

Sci-fi, though, was a different story. By wrapping his ideas in allegory, Serling could scotch the censors and say exactly what he wanted about totalitarianism, mass hysteria, prejudice, selfishness, conspiracy theorists, hate. Each episode of The Twilight Zone had a distinct message enunciated in Serling’s narration, making the moral of the story clear for even the most careless viewer. In “The Obsolete Man” (1961), a fable about a librarian in a futuristic state that has outlawed books, Serling observes how the “iron rule” of dictatorships is that “logic is an enemy and truth is a menace.” In “The Brain Center at Whipple’s” (1964), a story about a factory owner who replaces all his employees with technology, only to suffer the same fate, Serling notes that “there are many bromides applicable here: ‘too much of a good thing,’ ‘tiger by the tail,’ ‘as you sow so shall you reap.’” The Twilight Zone is essentially Aesop with a 20th-century imagination. It’s also timeless.

Oddly enough, these morals are missing from the new series, which features an on-camera Peele in Serling’s role. So is the element of grim justice that both The Twilight Zone and its modern heir, Black Mirror, have always held at their core—the kind of karmic inevitability that sees an SS captain subjected to the same torture he meted out to prisoners, or a woman sentenced to endure the fear and violence of an angry mob after committing a horrendous crime herself. Serling’s The Twilight Zone is defined by its twists, but not a single thing happens in the new series that you won’t be able to predict, at least from the four episodes made available for review. This isn’t really a reboot; it doesn’t even qualify as fan fiction. With the exception of one superior episode, “Replay,” it’s hard to conceive that an artist as prodigiously talented and thoughtful as Peele is creatively involved at all.

I attempted to decipher the messages that the first four episodes might be trying to convey, but only ended up stumped. The premiere installment, available for CBS All Access subscribers, is titled “The Comedian,” and stars Kumail Nanjiani as a stand-up, Samir, whose politically charged routine keeps bombing with audiences. (Which, really? This is the era of John Oliver eviscerations and Hasan Minhaj and Nanette.) After one especially disastrous set, Samir randomly encounters an elusive comedy great (played by Tracy Morgan), who tells him the secret to success: He has to put more of his personal life into his act. “The audience don’t care what you think,” Morgan’s character says. “They care about you.”

Samir tries riffing on new subjects—his dog, his nephew, his high-school bullies. There is, of course, a cost to those he brings into his act, and the more successful Samir gets, the more he ends up losing. Certain themes that recur in the episode seem ripe for picking at: whether comedy counts as art, how comedians can offer insight into the human condition, whether comedy is about making people laugh first and foremost. But they’re left floating in the ether, while Samir goes through a series of superficial realizations about his own grandiosity and the Faustian bargain of fame. The question of what we’re supposed to take away from his story is a perplexing one. Is it that putting your personal life into your art is bad? (Because if so, I say again, Nanette.) Is this an elaborate rant about contemporary audiences being too shallow for insightful truths? Because that’s not what Serling thought.

This particular reboot has another problem, something that bedevils virtually every streaming show: Its episodes are way too long. Serling’s The Twilight Zone tied its stories up neatly within 30 minutes, including space for commercials. The brevity of the format dispensed with extraneous waffling—there was no time, for example, to show a comedian delivering the same joke about the Second Amendment five separate times. But there was space for a surprising amount of world-building (Serling’s narration did a lot of work here), and for a tidy one-act play that zips along. “The Comedian,” by contrast, is 54 minutes long. (It’s worth remembering that in 1963, The Twilight Zone’s running time was stretched to 60 minutes, but after one season the change was swiftly reversed.)

“A Traveler,” another new episode that runs longer than 50 minutes, suffers more from this extended storytelling time than most, given that its twist is apparent from the minute a mysterious man in a suit (Steven Yeun) appears in a remote Alaskan prison cell on Christmas Eve. The questions of who this man is, where he came from, and what he wants should be the most urgent issues underpinning the episode. But because the story devolves into a series of yawning subplots—a police deputy’s (Marika Sila) odd relationship with her brother, her antagonism toward her narcissistic boss (Greg Kinnear)—there’s very little tension surrounding the newcomer, who identifies only as A. Traveler. Yeun (Burning) is magnetic as the enigmatic interloper, and the episode has intriguing subtext about colonizers and the colonized that seems to beg for more overt allegorizing. But Peele’s closing narration, the part that’s supposed to explain to viewers how to interpret what they’ve just seen, is opaque. (“There’s no difference between myth and mistruth” means nothing no matter how you slice it.)

The best of the four new episodes, “Replay,” functions so well because it incorporates tension into its setup. Nina (Sanaa Lathan), is taking her son, Dorian (Damson Idris), to college, a fictional HBCU called Tennyson. Dorian wants to be a filmmaker and to inspire people with the stories he puts into the world. But it’s the camera Nina wields, an old-fashioned camcorder, that seems to have profound power after she discovers she can use it to rewind time.

This is the kind of slightly hokey, completely implausible, suspend-your-disbelief scenario that The Twilight Zone has always aced. It’s easy to imagine, say, a character played by Burgess Meredith discovering a clock with similar qualities in a 1960s-era episode, and then trying (and failing) to go back to his glory days, imparting a valuable be-careful-what-you-wish for message about nostalgia along the way. But in “Replay,” the camera itself isn’t the point so much as what Nina uses it for. Throughout the episode, she’s plagued by a racist highway cop, Officer Lasky (Glenn Fleshler), who poses grave danger to Dorian, and no matter how she tries to escape or placate him, there he is. “He keeps pulling us over, again and again and again,” a desperate Nina says in one scene, “no matter what route we take, how nice or mean we are … There’s nothing I can do.”

The episode is so powerful because it forces audiences to feel the frustration and fear that Nina feels, but also the inevitability of antagonists like this one. No matter how hard Nina tries to get Lasky to see her as a person, to buy him a slice of apple pie and tell him about how proud she is of her son and how much he means to her, Lasky can’t be swayed. Fleshler communicates his impotent rage, his petty tyranny over a stretch of highway, his racism. In Nina’s hands, the magical camcorder feels like a device that might help her escape what Lasky represents, but it turns out to be less powerful than something else she’s been ignoring. Cameras, the episode makes clear in one of its most resonant moments, aren’t enough.

“Replay” shows what a modern Twilight Zone could really be, offering the kind of sociopolitical analysis Serling excelled at, but without the folksiness of 1950s television. For the most part, though, the new series feels like anthology storytelling by the numbers, more concerned with Easter eggs and recurring themes (“Lasky” is also the name of a street in “The Comedian,” and the number 1015 repeats across episodes) than with trying to emulate what the original show did so well—making audiences see the world with more clarity.

“Nightmare at 30,000 Feet,” a dismal episode starring Adam Scott, is the worst of the four, a clunky, cutesy “what if” story about a magazine journalist on a flight to Tel Aviv. The story is loosely inspired by a vintage Twilight Zone episode with William Shatner, in which a man recovering from a nervous breakdown sees a gremlin on the wing of his commercial plane. Scott’s character, Justin Sanderson, is similarly recovering from PTSD after reporting in war zones, but when he takes his seat on the plane, he finds a mysterious audio device in the seat pocket in front of him. It plays him a podcast, seemingly from the future, that investigates the mystery of how the flight Sanderson is on ended in tragedy.

Forget the corniness of a podcast that portends the future, or the improbability of a world in which magazine journalists fly first class. The episode has no tension, no investment in any of the characters. You might be less curious about how the plane actually goes down than in how the producers managed to nail the production of the fake podcast itself—the smug, omniscient narrator and the clinky background music. But more damaging is how totally unclear it is what the episode is supposed to do. Serling’s original episode interrogated preconceived ideas about anxiety and mental confusion; his central character has no credibility because he’s suffered a nervous breakdown, and seems to fear being crazy even more than he fears actually being right about the gremlin. The new “Nightmare” has none of this subtext. “In his final moments, Justin Sanderson made the case that he did everything he could to avert disaster,” Peele opines. “But in the end, he was an investigative reporter unwilling to investigate himself, until it was too late.” Bromide salad. Cliché. Fin.
What’s strangest of all about the reboot is its defiant lack of darkness, its unwillingness to even scratch at the human psyche. This could be a possible response to the fact that Black Mirror already exists, and that its creator, Charlie Brooker, had The Twilight Zone at the forefront of his mind when he created it. The new Twilight Zone isn’t frightened of what technology is doing to us, as Black Mirror is, nor is it particularly concerned with Serling’s great preoccupation—how humanity has always found ways to torture itself. It has none of the indelible eeriness or the subconscious probings of Us, Peele’s most recent film, which is itself inspired by a Twilight Zone episode. Nothing feels sinister. Everything feels safe. In a world so weird that it’s frequently likened to a bad computer simulation, this Twilight Zone is blandness stretched into an hour-long format, storytelling that feels oddly neutered before it even begins.



Editor's Note: Read more stories in our series about women and political power.

In 19th-century America, the struggle for women’s rights—including the right to vote, enshrined nearly 100 years ago in the Nineteenth Amendment—often went hand in hand with other social and political goals: from abolishing slavery and securing Native American land rights to promoting temperance and championing the dress-reform movement. Dress reformers proposed comfortable and healthful alternatives to confining garments such as corsets and crinolines, the cagelike steel underskirts that characterized female fashion at the time.

Chafing against clothing norms was, of course, not quite the same thing as rebelling against the patriarchy, but the two issues frequently overlapped, starting in the mid-1800s. Women demanded physical freedom along with other, less tangible liberties, and many early feminists embraced what was euphemistically known as “freedom dress”—or, in other words, pants. But rather than spurring the suffrage movement forward, the garment prompted widespread backlash from a society that saw it as a sign of moral decay and a threat to male power.

At a time when long, voluminous skirts were standard, pants for women existed only on the fringes of fashion, in utopian communes and health resorts. They might have stayed there if not for Elizabeth Smith Miller. The daughter of wealthy abolitionists, Miller had the confidence to break the rules and the privilege to get away with it. In an 1892 essay published in The Arena, she recalled an experience she had in the spring of 1851:

While spending many hours at work in the garden, I became so thoroughly disgusted with the long skirt, that the dissatisfaction … suddenly ripened into the decision that this shackle should no longer be endured … Turkish trousers to the ankle with a skirt reaching some four inches below the knee, were substituted for the heavy, untidy, exasperating old garment.

Shortly thereafter, Miller wore this unconventional costume on a visit to Seneca Falls, New York, where she stayed with her cousin Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Stanton and her friend and neighbor Amelia Bloomer “at once joined me in wearing the new costume,” Miller recalled. Bloomer, a temperance activist and abolitionist, had launched a newspaper for women, The Lily, following the first women’s-rights convention, which was held in Seneca Falls in 1848. When Bloomer published an editorial in praise of the new outfit in the April 1851 issue, circulation soared, and she was inundated with requests for patterns from around the country. Thus, the “freedom dress” got a new name: the bloomer.

Today the term bloomer is usually applied to baggy, bifurcated undergarments. But the original bloomer costume was a two-piece ensemble resembling the shalwar kameez of Central and South Asia. Shortly after the bloomer’s appearance in The Lily, the British humor magazine Punch described it “as a sort of shemale dress … trousers tight at ankles, and for [the] most part frilled; tunic descending with some degree of brevity perhaps to [the] knees, ascending to [the] throat.” Though this “masquerade frippery” was a dangerous harbinger of “female radicalisms,” in Punch’s words, the magazine acknowledged that it had some merits: Namely, it freed women from disfiguring corsets and crinolines. But while health concerns were a socially acceptable reason for reforming fashion, for many, political ideology was not.

Within weeks of its first appearance in The Lily, the bloomer reportedly spread as far as California and Texas. The American suffragist Hannah Tracy Cutler introduced the bloomer to Britain when she wore it at the World’s Peace Congress in London in August 1851. The bloomer also conquered popular culture in the form of caricatures, songs, and plays praising or mocking it—and usually misrepresenting its appearance. The term bloomerism came to be inevitably—if incorrectly—associated not just with wearing trousers but also with other supposedly deviant (for women) behaviors, such as smoking, drinking, gambling, serving in the military, and abandoning husbands and children. As Bloomer herself pointed out, wearing traditionally male garments suggested an across-the-board “usurpation of the rights of man”—notably, the right to vote.

Women who dared to wear bloomers faced what the American suffragist Mary Livermore described as a “daily crucifixion.” When Stanton and Miller strolled through Seneca Falls in their bloomers, they were “followed by a crowd of boys yelling, singing, and laughing, while every door and window was lined with staring faces,” the suffragist Mary S. Bull remembered. Though Stanton later recalled that she had felt “as joyous and free as some poor captive who has just cast off his ball and chain,” her young sons didn’t want to be seen with her. Her father banned the bloomer costume from his house. Her older sister “actually wept,” Stanton reported to Miller in a letter, adding that her husband, Henry, a New York state senator, had discovered that “some good Democrats said they would not vote for a man whose wife wore the Bloomers.” Stanton confessed to Henry in another letter that she feared “the short dress”—as bloomers were commonly referred to—“will cost me the loss of my kin.” After two years, she gave it up, resuming the “uncomfortable, inconvenient, and many times dangerous” garments of her sex, as she described them to her son Neil in a letter. “Had I counted the cost of the short dress,” she told Miller, “I would never have put it on.”

Although Stanton had “passed a most bitter experience in the short dress,” her friend Susan B. Anthony was nonetheless determined to try it out. On February 16, 1854, Anthony wore her bloomers around Albany. At the end of the day, she complained: “I have … been in the streets and printing offices all the day long; had rude, vulgar men stare me out of countenance, and heard them say as I opened the doors, ‘There comes my Bloomer!’ Oh, hated name!” As Stanton told Lucy Stone, another suffragist who had tried, then given up, the bloomer: “We put the dress on for greater freedom, but what is physical freedom compared with mental bondage? By all means have the new dress made long.” Anthony agreed, though her experience in the bloomer had taught her a valuable lesson: “that women can never compete successfully with men in the various industrial avocations, in long skirts. No one knows their bondage save the few of us who have known the freedom of short skirts.”

Miller, too, eventually abandoned the bloomer. Her father was elected to Congress in 1852, and her bloomer costume allowed her to navigate the filthy streets of Washington, D.C., in cleanliness and comfort, and “to carry my babies up and down stairs with perfect ease and safety.” But while “the dress looked tolerably well in standing and walking,” when seated, “a more awkward, uncouth effect, could hardly be … imagined,” she admitted. Eventually, she had her skirts “lengthened several inches and the trousers abandoned,” though she continued to eschew corsets, long trains, bustles, high heels, and chokers.

By 1859, even the bloomer’s namesake had finally forsaken it. “In the minds of some people, the short dress and woman’s rights were inseparably connected,” Bloomer wrote in 1895. “With us, the dress was but an incident, and we were not willing to sacrifice greater questions to it.” The bloomer’s demise was part of a larger fashion reckoning, as dress reformers came to believe that their shocking sartorial experiments were unhelpful distractions from more pressing issues. In 1865, the National Dress Reform Association actually disbanded amid concerns that negative attention on dress reform was holding back other causes members held dear. Going forward, American suffragists largely strove to conform to fashion rather than upend it, rebranding themselves as respectable women instead of radicals. Instead of inviting unflattering comparisons to men, suffragists now strove to look as feminine—and, thus, as harmless—as possible.

While Amelia Bloomer’s name became a punch line, Susan B. Anthony would be remembered for a much different fashion statement: a demure red shawl, one example of which survives in the Smithsonian. When the National American Woman Suffrage Association convention met in Washington in 1898, media coverage focused on Anthony’s trademark shawl. “It is silk crepe of exquisite fineness, with long, heavy knotted fringe,” the Evening Star reported. “For full thirty years Miss Anthony’s red shawl has been the oriflamme of suffrage battle. She wears it with the grace of a Spanish belle.”

Highly visible without being flamboyant, Anthony’s shawl was arguably a secret weapon in making progressive feminism palatable to a wider audience. At an appearance in Philadelphia in 1905, “the figure of Miss Anthony was simplicity itself,” The Philadelphia Press reported. “That bonnet, with the kind blue eyes beneath it, those spectacles, that plain dress and quaint red shawl, and, above all, that sweet, gentle voice, spelled ‘mother’ as plainly as the fine word ever was written. Not a hint of mannishness but all that man loves and respects. What man could deny any right to a woman like that?”



Heidi Schreck’s What the Constitution Means to Me is, on paper, quite a sloppy Broadway show. It begins with Schreck recounting her adolescent experiences competing in the American Legion’s Oratorical Contest, where high-school students give speeches on the U.S. Constitution (the prize money helped pay for her college education). As she reenacts her younger self’s presentation, Schreck steps out of character more and more often; she comments on the life she’d go on to lead, rhapsodizes about her connection to a toy sock monkey, and delves into the sad truths she learned about her family history. Eventually, Schreck abandons her teenage recollections entirely, joking that a more expensive show would be able to change the America Legion Hall set behind her. Then, she invites an actual high-school student onstage with her to debate whether the document should be abolished.

The themes don’t tie up perfectly, and Schreck doesn’t offer easy answers. This is no TED Talk with a punchy, definitive conclusion. Instead, the show ends with Schreck and her teenage debate partner sitting back-to-back and asking each other questions about the future, as the lights dim to black. A finalist for the 2019 Pulitzer Prize for Drama, the play is as open-ended as the laws it’s discussing, a hodgepodge of ideas, memories, and critiques spanning Schreck’s whole life, much as the Constitution is forever being amended and argued over. “It’s a messy collision of political thought and law and questions and the weirdness and chaotic energy of actual human lives,” Schreck told me in an interview at the Helen Hayes Theater, where the show is running until August 24.

She’s talking about both her play, which has been nominated for two Tonys (Best Play and Best Actress) after a hit transfer to Broadway, and the document itself. The speech that Schreck delivered as a teenager at American Legion halls around the country compared the Constitution to a crucible, a fiery vessel fusing competing ingredients into something functional. Her contemporary take wrestles with the fact that the Constitution relies on “negative rights,” largely saying that the government cannot do things (such as bar free speech), but doesn’t mandate “positive rights,” like saying the government can provide certain services (such as health care or education). She then relates how not having those kinds of services affected her family and women like her over the decades.

As the show goes on, Schreck tries to reconcile the Constitution’s many flaws. “I think the act of examining it every night and exploring it in this very personal, very emotional way has led me to question a lot of things about how our laws are made and how our country works,” she told me. “I have become frustrated with how difficult it is to amend and change. I have become frustrated about what I believe are the structural impediments to democracy baked into it—the Electoral College, the Senate.”

Schreck’s play grapples with the fact that U.S. courts have offered wildly different interpretations of the Constitution depending on the era. Perhaps the best example of the document’s mutability is the Ninth Amendment, a one-sentence part of the Bill of Rights that clarifies that a right can still exist even if it isn’t explicitly laid out.

“The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people,” the text reads. Schreck recalled that the constitutional scholar Laurence Tribe described the Ninth Amendment as “the only piece of writing in the document that tells you how to read it,” a mini instruction manual reminding the country that the Bill of Rights is a work in progress. Schreck interprets the amendment to mean, “We didn’t write down every single thing—that’s part of your work as a country, as a society, as people, to figure out what other rights need to be protected.”

The Ninth Amendment has been debated since its inception. The conservative jurist Robert Bork famously called it an “inkblot” worth ignoring at his failed Supreme Court confirmation hearings, while Justice Arthur Goldberg cited it in his concurrence on the case Griswold v. Connecticut, which struck down a law criminalizing the use of contraceptives. That the amendment was crucial to such a pivotal decision while its vagueness is still a matter of academic discussion is all part of the bundle of contradictions that Schreck is digging into. “I like that there’s something in the Bill of Rights that’s difficult to parse, that suggests that it isn’t all spelled out here,” she said.

For that reason, she’s bothered by the notion of “originalism” supported by jurists such as Bork and the late Antonin Scalia, who argued that the document shouldn’t be open to much interpretation at all. Schreck says she wants to reclaim the word originalism. “It does seem absurd to me that there’s a view of this document that says it’s whole and perfect the way it was created. That, to me, seems like magical thinking,” she said. “There’s [another] view of originalism that says originally the document was designed to be a living thing … it’s obviously alive, because it’s changed tremendously over the last 200 years.”

Still, the growing emphasis on originalism has sometimes turned the Supreme Court into a bulwark against more activist legislation, leaving Schreck to wonder if things might not work better with a clean slate. At the end of every performance, she and her young sparring partner (played by either Thursday Williams or Rosdely Ciprian, real high-school students from New York, depending on the night) debate abolishing the Constitution entirely and put the question to the audience for a vote. While Schreck estimated that the audience picks “keep” about 85 percent of the time, she noted that current affairs often influence the results.

“In the last couple weeks, and this happened during the Kavanaugh hearings too, people have been voting to abolish a lot more,” Schreck said, referring to recent anti-abortion laws passed in various states with the explicit aim of drawing Supreme Court attention. “I think anytime the people coming to this show feel like ... these structures really are not serving us, that’s when [they] seem ready to, in the context of theatrical pretend, burn it all down.” My audience played it safe, siding with Williams, who argued that night for “keep.” Schreck and her scene partners might take either side depending on the night, but she has found that who is arguing which position doesn’t really matter.

“I’m fascinated by the fact that, even within the context of [the] play, the audience takes [the vote] seriously enough not to want to put our country at risk. Which I appreciate—them taking it that seriously,” she said with a laugh. To her, the debate is there to prod the audience into questioning the foundations of American democracy. “I’m trying to reflect the fact that these very abstract laws are connected to the most important parts of people’s lives, but also the weird little personal parts of our lives, which is why I feel the freedom to talk about the four generations of abuse in my family, but also my sock monkey,” she said. For most audience members, the Constitution is mere background noise for their day-to-day lives. Schreck’s play brings it to the forefront, where she thinks it belongs.



The New York City teenagers Yusef Salaam, Korey Wise, Kevin Richardson, Raymond Santana, and Antron McCray were not born in the wild. The boys, who were all arrested in 1989 after a 28-year-old white woman was brutally raped and abandoned in Central Park, called the sweltering metropolis their home. Their world was one of concrete and cookouts, basketball and barber shops. Before their arrest, the teens crested through their city with youthful ebullience. They were “just baby boys.”
But in the days following the rape of Trisha Meili, the teens—ages 14 to 16—transmogrified into a “wolf pack.” They became “savage.” Meili, who became known as the “Central Park jogger,” was often characterized as their “prey.” The flurry of media attention reached a galling crescendo when Donald J. Trump, then a local real-estate mogul, purchased full-page ads in four New York publications calling for the return of the death penalty so that the boys could be executed.

The boys eventually became known as the “Central Park Five,” a pithy moniker picked up by local and national media outlets that served as much to undercut their humanity as it did to free up copy space. “If they had their way,” Salaam told CNN in 2012, 10 years after a man named Matias Reyes confessed to the crime and two years before the Central Park Five received a $41 million settlement from the City of New York, “we would have been hanging from one of those lovely trees here in Central Park.”

In When They See Us, the Ava DuVernay–helmed miniseries now streaming on Netflix, the director lays out the all-too-common process by which the five black and Latino teens were convicted of a crime they did not commit. In rendering their journeys, DuVernay pays careful attention to the terrifying power of language, especially the animalistic rhetoric with which prosecutors and journalists referred to the teens. (Trump is referenced often, particularly in the second installment; he is depicted as the most powerful of the boys’ zealous detractors, not the sole purveyor of racial animus.)

In its early installments, When They See Us implicates New York media, and the ensuing frenzy of the public, in spurring along the boys’ wrongful verdicts. The series re-creates the glee with which people seized upon words such as wildin’, common slang for any range of boisterous behavior, as evidence of the boys’ inherent criminality. When They See Us answers the how.
The series enters a broader landscape of artistic reckoning with the Central Park Five case, as well as with the country’s history of weaponizing language against black and brown people. Most immediately, a new project from the artist and journalist Alexandra Bell appears in this year’s Whitney Biennial. No Humans Involved—After Sylvia Wynter takes its name from a seminal 1994 essay by the scholar and poet. In it, Wynter wrote at length about “NHI,” the unofficial acronym that Los Angeles law enforcement used to classify cases involving black men. Referencing a term coined by the sociologist Helen Fein, Wynter wrote that the acronym, and its attendant category of “nonhuman,” rendered black men (and by extension, all black people) targets for systemic violence:

For the social effects to which this acronym, and its placing outside the “sanctified universe of obligation,” of the category of young Black males to which it refers, leads, whilst not overtly genocidal, are clearly having genocidal effects with the incarceration and elimination of young Black males by ostensibly normal and everyday means.

Bell’s Wynter-inspired series is composed of photo prints she made using an exacting process of lithography and screen-printing. No Humans Involved zeroes in on the New York Daily News coverage of the Central Park Five case. The paper published some of the most egregious reporting on the case—details of the minors’ addresses and family histories, and inflammatory headlines such as “WOLF PACK’S PREY”—well before the case was even (wrongfully) adjudicated. The Daily News also published Trump’s full-page ad. By redacting and highlighting specific text and images from 10 days of the publication’s 1989 issues, Bell underscores the devastating effects of the outlet’s glaring bias against the young black and brown boys. “I really want people to look at [my series] and question the role that the Daily News played in the way we viewed these particular people,” she told The New Yorker recently. “And maybe even in some ways the outcome ultimately of the case.”

When They See Us offers a different pathway to illuminating the effects of these biases. DuVernay’s commitment to portraying the boys before they were ensnared by the case proves most excruciating. Viewers meet Antron (Caleel Harris), Raymond (Marquis Rodriguez), Kevin (Asante Blackk), Korey (Jharrel Jerome), and Yusef (Ethan Herisse) as goofy kids before seeing the process by which the criminal-justice system and media operated in concert to portray them as savages.
The series is at its most heartrending when it shows the boys, and their families, reacting to the ambient fury surrounding them: The horror of their arrest, verdict, and incarceration, and the lingering psychological effects of the whole ordeal ripple out beyond just the five. The teen actors deliver particularly masterly performances—they hold both immense joy and deep vulnerability. To the extent that young black and Latino men still require external humanizing from artistic productions, When They See Us presents a gut-wrenching look at the real-life terror wrought by their ongoing dehumanization.

DuVernay’s work has long documented the sweeping injustices that black and brown people face in America. Selma, her 2014 feature film, followed the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. throughout pivotal moments in the civil-rights movement of the 1960s (and in his own life). Her 2016 documentary, 13th, traced how the Thirteenth Amendment—which abolished slavery—led to mass incarceration. When They See Us, which DuVernay began conceptualizing after Raymond Santana approached the director with the idea via Twitter, charts a more recent history. The Central Park Five case was first reported only three decades ago. The language used to indict the teens in public opinion and the legal ramifications of their case still reverberate now.When They See Us is a particularly dramatized production, but it’s not the first visual reexamination of the teens’ case. In 2012, the directors Ken Burns, Sarah Burns, and David McMahon debuted The Central Park Five, a documentary reflective of the Barack Obama era in which it was released. “Measured in tone and outraged in its argument, it is an emotionally stirring, at times crushingly depressing cinematic call to witness,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her New York Times review at the time.

DuVernay’s project enters a wildly different political landscape. The man who wielded his money and influence to call for the teens’ execution now occupies the White House. From his perch, he refers to Mexicans as “rapists” and black men as “thugs”; the language of dehumanization has again shed its politesse. It’s understandable, then, if also sometimes frustrating, that When They See Us sometimes abandons subtlety in its references to Trump. The president’s lengthy, bombastic oeuvre of bigotry creates both a moral terror and an artistic quandary.
Still, When They See Us pulls back the language of biased prosecution and journalistic malfeasance to revelatory effect. At the end—despite the cloud of animus that surrounds them—Yusef, Antron, Kevin, Korey, and Raymond get to be human.



Editor's Note: What you’re reading is the exclusive newsletter for The Atlantic’s membership program, The Masthead. Today we’re making it accessible to everyone. Learn more.

Masthead Weekly 06.14.19

Welcome to your exclusive, members-only email from The Atlantic. Today you’ll get an orientation on the tough questions raised about American public life in Ava DuVernay’s Netflix show When They See Us. You’ll get a quick heads-up about a few items that’ll be making news next week, including Slack’s listing plans and the competition to find America’s ugliest dog (woof). And you’ll hear what other members have been up to this week (kittens!). Read on.

By Hannah Giorgis

What we’re watching: Thirty years ago, five New York City teenagers were arrested for—and later falsely convicted of—the rape and attempted murder of a 28-year-old woman named Trisha Meili, who became known as the Central Park Jogger. That landmark case is examined anew in the Ava DuVernay miniseries When They See Us.

The project spends much of its run time explicating the racist logic and manipulative tactics by which New York City law enforcement, aided by uncritical media coverage, criminalized the five black and Latino boys, whose case-defining confessions were coerced and whose guilt was presumed before they entered any courtroom. But crucially, When They See Us also introduces viewers to—and thereby emphasizes the innocence of—Yusef Salaam, Raymond Santana, Korey Wise, Kevin Richard, and Antron McCray as it indicts the systems that led to their incarceration.

DuVernay’s four-part Netflix series began streaming May 31, and has reached wide audiences in the weeks since. (It has been the most watched original series on the platform every day since it began streaming.) When They See Us, originally titled The Central Park Five, joins other artistic works addressing the case and its lingering effects: The final installment of the series depicts an incarcerated man named Matias Reyes confessing to Meili’s rape in 2002; the so-called Central Park Five were exonerated soon afterward, and later received a $41 million settlement from the city of New York. The city did not admit wrongdoing.

Why it matters: The boys each spent between six and 14 years in prison. But the case also rippled out beyond New York state. It established a precedent for children—primarily children of color—standing trial as adults in courtrooms across the country. The language evoked by the case and its attendant media coverage heightened hysteria about “savage” young black and brown men, contributing to an uptick of incarceration rates.When They See Us has brought renewed scrutiny to the host of actors who pushed the five boys into the criminal-justice system—namely, national media; President Donald Trump, who purchased full-page ads in 1989 in several New York publications to call for the five boys’ execution; and the former New York City prosecutor Linda Fairstein. Fairstein has written an op-ed for The Wall Street Journal referring to DuVernay’s series as a “fabrication,” despite Reyes’s confession and the city’s subsequent settlement. “Some of her assertions do not match up with the record,” The New York Times wrote.

Though Fairstein’s actions contributed to a catastrophic miscarriage of justice, her actions exist within the broader context of the injustices visited by the American criminal-justice system. Or, as DuVernay said when asked about Fairstein’s op-ed, “I think that it would be a tragedy if this story and the telling of it came down to one woman being punished for what she did because it’s not about her. It’s not all about her. She is part of a system that’s not broken, it was built to be this way.”

What we’re asking: What might accountability for the original false convictions look like? Fairstein has resigned from board seats and been dropped by her publisher; other individuals involved might also be removed from their positions of prominence. What does justice mean for Meili, or for the other victims of Reyes, who was never questioned in the Central Park Jogger case and went on to commit several more violent crimes? How might the discussion of the Central Park Five case shift from the aberration of false convictions to the broader catastrophe of incarceration?

What’s next: Wednesday evening, Oprah Winfrey’s OWN network aired When They See Us Now, an interview in which the former talk-show host spoke with the “Exonerated Five” about the case, its aftermath, and their hopes for what When They See Us will inspire in its viewers. Winfrey interviewed Meili in 2002, right after the men were exonerated; at the time, the host’s sympathies for Meili led her to speak about the five men with contempt despite their innocence. Her new interview, which is also available on Netflix, doesn’t find her grappling with her own role in spreading public opinion of their guilt. When They See Us Now does, however, offer viewers an opportunity to hear directly from the Exonerated Five. “It is bittersweet,” Santana says, “because watching this is painful, but it’s necessary … We need to make sure things change now.”
It remains unclear whether the City of New York will amend any legal rulings or public statements about the original case—or the work of any law-enforcement officers. The surge of attention paid to the case could, however, portend heightened public interest in efforts to reform the criminal-justice system.

Notes on the news to come

The distance between the ordinary and the revolutionary is often shorter than it might seem. One minute, the iPhone was a rare, colorful party trick. The next, 2.5 billion people had smartphones in their pockets. So it is, too, with the cloud-based platforms where people congregate to socialize, to work, or to do both. In this realm, the start-up Slack is the darling of the past decade. People who swear by the chat software say it’s had a transformative effect on the way people work in the 21st century. But the business picture is murkier. Slack has enjoyed strong revenue growth in the past year, but the company still isn’t profitable. Now, Slack is going public via a direct listing on June 20—a slightly less intensive process than the IPO route—and investors are watching its performance closely for signs of trouble in tech. They view Slack as a bellwether among high-profile listings, especially after Uber flopped spectacularly in its IPO last month. WeWork, Airbnb, Peloton, and Palantir are all expected to go public in 2019.

A group behind Hong Kong’s massive protests is planning another large-scale political action Sunday, after a week in which hundreds of thousands of residents demonstrated. Protesters object to a bill that would allow extraditions to mainland China, fearing that it would undermine the legal autonomy the territory has enjoyed since it was transferred back to the People’s Republic of China in 1999. Beijing controls a majority of the territory’s legislature, but Hong Kong’s leaders have hesitated in the face of popular opposition. Debate on the bill was initially sped up, but today, a member of the territory’s Executive Council warned against rushing any decisions. “Our first task right now is on how to mollify the public to avoid more clashes in [the] future,” Council Convenor Bernard Chan said.

The late fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld once said that he’d “rather die” than have a funeral. True to his wishes, after his death in February, Lagerfeld was cremated without a ceremony. But on June 20, Chanel, Fendi, and the Karl Lagerfeld brand will host a memorial event in honor of the three houses’ former creative director. Scheduled during Men’s Fashion Week in Paris, the event has pomp: The theater and opera director Robert Carsen is staging a slate of performances, and only fashion’s elite will be in attendance. But Carsen is careful not to call the event a funeral. It is “a joyful celebration of all things Karl,” he says.

In the World’s Ugliest Dog Contest, the best in show is the worst in show. On June 21, judges will be looking for grotesque jowls, misshapen teeth, and homely patches of hair (Chinese crested mixes frequent the competition). Last year’s winner, an English bulldog named Zsa Zsa, was crowned for her distended tongue that dangled drool down her chest. This year, a bug-eyed chihuahua named Tostito Kevin, whose lower jaw is missing, is a favorite to win. The contest has a noble purpose: Organizers say it advocates “the adoration of all animals,” especially pedigree-less pets with health issues—the underdogs, you could call them. Zsa Zsa, who spent five years at a puppy mill before her owner took her in, died only a month after winning her title.

Items this week by Adrienne LaFrance, Matt Peterson, and Karen Yuan. Illustrations by Matt Chinworth. 

Insights from Atlantic history

40 Years Ago

Ten years before the arrest of the so-called Central Park Five, a prominent writer assigned to jury duty deliberated over another young black man’s innocence.

“I did not know if my conviction that the police did not frame David Moore constituted evidence any more than [the juror] Oscar Williams's conviction that the boy could not have raised his arm with a gun in it and not be shot dead constituted a reasonable doubt. And I did not really care if the boy was guilty or not guilty, if he was punished or set free, if the police were supported or attacked. But the abdication of thought frightened me. That did matter. In fact it seemed to be the only thing that mattered, and it mattered that it was we—[the jurors] Gerald and I and all the rest—who wouldn't do the thinking.”  — Vivian Gornick, June 1979

Updates from the Masthead community

An Atlantic story that provoked members

“I think that, notwithstanding the apparently irreconcilable dissonances in their position, evangelicals don’t actually think that differently from liberals or any other identifiable ideological group. They are motivated by different goals and principles, but the thought processes by which they get from those goals and principles to the coarse, binary decisions such as who they will support at a national level are pretty similar. We all understand ourselves better by understanding those we disagree with better.”  — @walnutclosefarm, a member, writing on the forums about “What a Clash Between Conservatives Reveals”

An Atlantic editor shares a recommendation with the Book Club

“Barbara Kingsolver [has] a knack for portraying the chance connections and circumstances that can lead ‘ordinary’ women to become passionate about social causes. Her 2012 novel Flight Behavior, while occasionally a little heavy-handed in its messaging, is a poignant story about family dynamics as well as a fable about climate change. (I read it shortly after the 2016 election, and found its critiques of mass media and portrayal of rural Appalachia pretty strikingly prescient to the discourse that then dominated the news.)”  — Rosa Inocencio Smith, an editor on the Culture desk

What’s happening in members’ lives

“We adopted kittens, from the SPCA. I always prefer to acquire cats in pairs, so they can keep each other sane and entertained … It’s been over 95 degrees for the past three days here in the East Bay, and the new additions evidently feel that the place to beat the heat is under a bed. They may still have a few things to learn. They don’t have names yet — which is driving my stepdaughter crazy — but I’m a firm believer that, before too long, cats tell you what their names should be. I can wait.”  — @louquillio, a member, writing on the forums

Join a discussion

Here are a few of the active conversations on the forums this week. Join in, or start your own.

We want your feedback. Email us at themasthead@theatlantic.com.



“And if there is another end beyond the dead end, it cannot be called dead, can it?”

In Yiyun Li’s novel Where Reasons End, an unnamed narrator converses with her teenage son, Nikolai, in the months following his death by suicide. This question, posed by the narrator, is one of many attempts by a grieving mother to make sense of losing her son by interrogating language itself. Throughout the book, she ruminates on the etymology of words such as grieve and patience, as if, by defining these terms, she can find meaning in her experience of them. She and Nikolai banter over word choice and flit in and out of shared memories. Nikolai, who is omniscient, reads her mind and responds to her thoughts; his mother wonders how much longer their conversation can last.

A stunning exploration of suffering and loss, Where Reasons End is made all the more wrenching by its real-life context. Li wrote of her own struggle with depression, as well as her two previous suicide attempts, in the 2017 memoir Dear Friend, From My Life I Write to You in Your Life. Once trained as an immunologist, she described depression as an “auto-immune disease” in which the mind “targets every feeling and thought it creates.” The premise of Where Reasons End was also drawn from her life: Less than a year after the publication of her memoir, Li’s 16-year-old son killed himself.

“I was almost you once,” the narrator of Where Reasons End tells her son. “And that’s why I have allowed myself to make up this world to talk with you.” A bridge between fiction and memoir, the novel offers a moving account of a parent’s attempt to understand and find expression for an unfathomable tragedy. As a work illustrating the potential for suicidal thoughts to pass from parent to child, the book also highlights a fraught public-health issue at a time when suicide rates across the United States are rising.

After someone dies by suicide, one of the first questions is often, “Why?” Public discussions about the subject can at times resemble a psychological autopsy, where people dissect the “clues” left behind in an attempt to find answers. As a pediatrics resident, I’ve seen how this preoccupation plays out in medicine and public health, where for every factor contributing to the problem, there is a potential intervention that can, and often does, minimize harm.

Given this context, one may be tempted to read Where Reasons End in search of the very answers denied by the title. Li’s narrator isn’t immune to the impulse to seek an explanation: She admits that “not knowing” what prompted her son’s death is “close to what people call a wound.” But just as the novel resists conventional narrative, Nikolai’s suicide is never analyzed or rationalized by the standard framework. There is no psychological autopsy. The dialogue between mother and son feels unending and timeless, and indeed, without focusing on the search for a reason, there can be no clear ending. Rejecting the formula that would typically provide “closure” after the death of a loved one is, it seems, Li’s point.

Where Reasons End fits into a broader conversation about art and media that depict depression and suicide. The risks of simply reading about suicide have been recognized for centuries. The novel The Sorrows of Young Werther, first published in 1774, was blamed for a spike of suicides among young men across Europe. Since then, numerous studies have pointed to the contagion effect that depictions of suicide in fiction and nonfiction can have on people already vulnerable to self-harm. The risks may be particularly high for teenagers, who are frequently the target of media on this topic. Think of movies such as Dead Poets Society and The Virgin Suicides, and the recent book turned Netflix series 13 Reasons Why, which drew widespread criticism for its irresponsible portrayal of a character who kills herself.

One complicating factor when it comes to creating art about suicide is the fact that many of the features that make for a “good story” are also those known to contribute to suicidal behaviors: heightened emotions, heroic or sentimental portrayals of suicidal characters, and, above all, depiction of the suicide itself. The worry—of public-health officials, researchers, doctors, and parents—is that when works embrace these elements, fiction might bleed into reality.

Li’s Where Reasons End is in a different category from many of its mass-media counterparts. The novel is also, without question, an exceptional piece of literature; Michael Schaub, writing for NPR, described it as “the rarest of things: a perfect book,” and the novelist Elizabeth McCracken called it “a masterpiece by a master.” The conversation between mother and son is poetic and philosophical, quiet and undemanding. In one passage, the narrator wonders, “Does one have to stay out of part of one’s own mind?” This prompts the following exchange:

If I’m the trespasser of my own mind I’ve acquitted myself, he said.

Then I shall acquit myself, too.

Don’t trespass in the first place, he said.

Too late, I said. To love is to trespass.

To live, too, he said. How can anyone not see it that way?

Here, fiction doesn’t just bleed into reality; it also gives life to the imaginary. The narrator, who is herself an author, writes her son back into existence by force of will, conjuring him into “a world made up by words, and words only. No images, no sounds.” The act of conjuring is familiar to her. “What I was doing was what I had always been doing,” the narrator thinks: “Writing stories.” As an author, the novel suggests, the narrator was a “parent” to a multitude of fictional characters. As a bereaved mother, she had only one recourse: to become the author of her child.

In its refusal to dwell on why, the book also offers a valuable counterpoint to the dominant narrative about suicide. In many media portrayals, finding a reason for someone’s suicide provides an ending to the story. Ultimately, this allows readers to disengage and move on. The result is that, after an initial outpouring of public support, interest in and attention to the problem tend to wane. Li’s portrayal of grief as something that doesn’t necessarily have a clear end point might be closer to real-life experience for many.

Yet Where Reasons End also suggests the narrator’s grim surrender to the inevitability of her son’s death—a notion that could contribute to destructive thought patterns for some readers. Early on, the narrator says, “Calling Nikolai’s action inexplicable was like calling a migrant bird ending on a new continent lost … Who can say the vagrant doesn’t have a reason to change the course of its flight?” Nikolai’s attitude toward his death is even more decisive. “I’m all clear now,” he tells his mother, “pure and perfect, just the way I want.” Later, his mother wonders, “Is it a fatal condition … for some people just being themselves?” The question hangs over the book, unanswered. Underlying these thoughts is the belief once expressed by Li at the height of her own depression: that suicide can seem like “an appropriate, even the only, option.”

Li’s novel arrives in a media landscape where the broader discourse about suicide is defined by a never-ending tension: between looking at and looking away, between feeling out the issue’s contours and recoiling from them. Fictional portrayals of suicide also exist in a middle ground, somewhere between art, entertainment, and, if we accept their potential for harm, self-fulfilling prophecy.

Of course, there is no right way to make art—and no simple way to produce “risk-free” art—about suicide. As an effort to paint a truthful picture of a mother’s grief, Where Reasons End occasionally indulges in a kind of fatalism, wondering whether this particular death was unavoidable. But the novel also takes the crucial step of dismantling a troubling trope in stories about suicide. Knowing she may never find all the right answers, Li’s narrator abandons that search. She writes her child back to life and, in doing so, responds to an act of destruction with an act of creation.



The worst acts of destruction in history have often been defended in moral terms. The taboo against killing innocent people proves violable enough when the cause is carrying out eye-for-an-eye justice (Alexander the Great sacking Persepolis in supposed revenge for Xerxes’s burning of the Acropolis) or forcing a swift peace (the United States’ atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki). The chilling logic that has been used to portray the razing of entire cities as enlightenment can sound a lot like what Daenerys Targaryen said on Sunday’s Game of Thrones: that “our mercy” is “toward future generations who will never again be held hostage by a tyrant.”

To viewers, Daenerys’s decision to obliterate the Westerosi capital of King’s Landing, a seaside city of 1 million people, would seem to transform her into “the Mad Queen.” After her army’s successful breaching of the city walls with the help of her dragon, the defending Lannister forces surrendered. Yet Khaleesi continued raining fire on men, women, and children indiscriminately. These are cruel acts, and they may have a purpose: Lords who would otherwise be unlikely to support a foreign invader, especially when news has spread of Jon Snow’s hereditary claim to the Iron Throne, must now fear that if they resist Dany, they’ll end up as ashes, too.

Possibly the most divisive episode in Thrones history, “The Bells” was redolent with reminders of real-world history: the Dresden firebombing, Vesuvius’s mass charring of bodies, Hitler and Eva Braun’s bunker death, and even the recent rubble of Aleppo. Conquering soldiers took license to rape and slaughter civilians, just as they have throughout humankind’s existence. Looking for more historical context on scorched-earth generals like Daenerys, I spoke with Barry Strauss, a historian at Cornell University who specializes in leaders of the ancient world. His most recent book is Ten Caesars: Roman Emperors From Augustus to Constantine. This conversation has been edited for clarity.

Spencer Kornhaber: Does the destruction of King’s Landing remind you of any episodes from history?

Barry Strauss: Historically, if people surrender when they’re approached by the enemy forces, they’re supposed to be treated humanely. If they resist, then the attacking army has the right to sack them and destroy them. This sounds like it’s in between. [The forces of King’s Landing] did resist, and when they realized it wasn’t going their way, they surrendered. That doesn’t put the defenders in a very strong position. Defeated cities in sieges are not a place you want to be.

There’s an infamous example in the Peloponnesian War: the island of Melos. The Athenians ask them to surrender, and leadership refuses and submits to a siege instead. The people of Melos are defeated—they don’t surrender—and then the Athenians kill all the men and enslave all the women and children.

Kornhaber: Viewers are now debating why Dany showed no mercy. When a place is defeated in a siege, has what happens next typically been thought of as a moral question for the conqueror? Or more of a strategic question?

Strauss: Unless the conqueror is completely bloodthirsty and not very intelligent, they’d always have strategic questions: How can we make this work for us? In the ancient world in particular, they don’t want to massacre most of the people, because they can enslave them. It’d be like destroying property. In the example I gave you in Melos, the Athenians massacred the men but they enslaved the children. So they’re making their point, they’re getting their revenge, but they’re also making a profit.

Kornhaber: When you say they’re making a point by massacring the men, what is that point?

Strauss: “Don’t mess with us!”

In Thucydides’s history of the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians famously debate the very question you just asked [about the point of brutality], because there’s an earlier example [than Melos] of a city that does surrender. There’s a siege of the city of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos. They hold out for a number of months and then realize they’re going to lose. It’s a city that’s run by an oligarchy and they don’t want to arm the common man till the last minute, because they don’t trust the common man. When they do arm the common man, the common man says, “Hey, we’re starving. Let’s surrender to Athens.” So they do.

Now the question is: What should the Athenians do? The Athenian assembly says, “Surrender, shmender. They’re all guilty. Let’s massacre all the men and enslave the women and children.” The next morning, they have a change of heart and debate it. One hard-line speaker says, “As a matter of justice, we need to kill all of the men because they did great harm to our city.” The next speaker says, “As a pragmatic matter, we should not kill them. If we kill all their men, then future rebels will never surrender and always fight to the death.” If you lay siege to a city, the only way to win is to starve them out, which takes a long time and is hard on you. So the higher wisdom is to spare them, not because we’re humane, but because this’ll serve our purposes later.

Thucydides is telling this story because he wants the readers to see how horrifying this is. Athens has become so brutalized by war that nobody can get up to say, “This is an atrocity! We’re good guys. We don’t do things like that!”

So that’s an example of a city that sounds a lot like King’s Landing. They resisted, and then they surrendered, and then the Athenians debated what to do before deciding for pragmatic reasons not to carry out a massacre. They still end up executing 1,000 men. It’d be nice if we knew what the population of the city was at the time, but we don’t. We figure that 1,000 men is a lot—10 percent of the adult-male population, maybe 20 percent? The bottom line is that in warfare in the ancient world, even if you surrender, your future’s not going to be a happy one.

Kornhaber: Dany might hope that her show of force will keep the other kingdoms from resisting her now. The concept of “Don’t mess with us”—of being brutal for the sake of deterrence—did it work in the ancient world?

Strauss: Sometimes yes and sometimes no. The Athenians were unpopular, and later they suffer a big defeat in Sicily. Their enemy, the Spartans, raises the flag of rebellion and many city-states rebel against Athens. Those rebels weren’t deterred.

In the case of the Romans, who were a lot more brutal than the Athenians and were able to bring much greater military power to bear, deterrence was generally more effective. But never 100 percent. Not many states are going to wake up one morning and go, “I’m sick of Rome, let’s rebel.” But if Hannibal and the Carthaginian army show up and say, “Hey, let’s rebel against Rome,” then in spite of Rome’s reputation for brutality, there are people who do rebel.

Kornhaber: Are there cases of brutality like this backfiring on conquerers because their own people decide the ruler is unjust or insane? Dany will now be seen as a mad queen and have to worry about dissent on her own side.

Strauss: Yes. Caesar is exceptionally brutal when he conquers Gaul. He ends up bragging that he killed a million men and enslaved a million civilians. One of Caesar’s political opponents at home says that Caesar’s behavior is so immoral that he should be arrested and handed over to the Gauls so they could do with him what they want. That doesn’t happen. But many Romans are convinced by Caesar’s behavior in Gaul that he’s a tyrant. At least indirectly, it’s one of the reasons why he’s assassinated in the end.

In the case of Athens, there are two revolutions against democracy in favor of a more oligarchic regime. They have many complaints against democracy. One is that democracy puts the mob in control, and the mob engages in atrocities. Euripides in Athens writes a play called The Trojan Women, which focuses on the women of Troy after Troy is captured. The play is seen as a commentary on the atrocities that Athens is carrying out in the Peloponnesian War, so it’s clear that there are people in Athens who think it’s immoral.

Kornhaber: Dany has long talked about her conquest by saying that she’s going to bring about a more just, liberated world. She does what she does for the mercy of future generations. Is that a rationale you hear throughout history to justify atrocities?

Strauss: An example where they specifically say that people will understand us later? Honestly, that sounds like the Nazis.

For the Romans and Greeks, it’s understood that they’re doing this for the good of their society and that sometimes it’s necessary to be brutal in war. Pericles, in his funeral oration, which was the model for the Gettysburg Address, says that we’re fighting for democracy. He talks in great detail about freedom and equality and the good life. But he doesn’t specifically say that justifies massacring civilians. I can’t think of any specific examples where the Greeks or Romans would say, “It’s a terrible thing we are doing, but it’s for the greater good.” There were also protests. Tacitus, the Roman writer, comments famously, “They make a desert and call it peace.”

Kornhaber: The Greeks and Romans didn’t have Dany’s dragon fire, which more resembles modern aerial weaponry. Can you speak to how considerations about mercy and brutality play out in modern warfare, once you have firebombing and the potential of nuclear annihilation?

Strauss: The lesson that slowly seeped in after World War II is that the use of terrible technological weapons should no longer be disproportionate. People should try to spare civilians as much as possible. Of course, in World War II, firebombing creates tremendous massacres of civilians. It was justified at the time by saying that terror would end the war more quickly.

In more recent years, we now have the technology where you can do pinpoint bombing. Maybe that’s still a misnomer, but it’s much easier to spare civilians now than then. But not every country does. When the Russians put down the Chechen rebellion, they pretty much flattened the city of Grozny. They weren’t being very careful about who they spared and who they didn’t. So you still see considerable brutality in warfare.

Kornhaber: Dany’s conquest recalls the paradigm of mutually assured destruction to some extent, no? Or at least the rest of the realm now knows they’re going to get nuked by a dragon if they rise up.

Strauss: Mutually assured destruction did work. It had a salutary effect of keeping the great powers from making war on each other. Of course, it didn’t prevent war at the margins, and many civilians were killed in those wars. But it did at least prevent general war in Europe between the Soviets and the Americans.

Kornhaber: Stepping back as a Thrones viewer and a historian, is there any particular historical figure you’ve thought about a lot with Dany?

Strauss: She certainly is a reminder of the Roman stereotype of Cleopatra. Cleopatra is presented as the evil seductress and the mad queen. The real Cleopatra was a much, much shrewder operator, more in control of things, and more careful than [what] we get [in depictions] from the Romans or in Shakespeare’s Antony and Cleopatra.

The good Daenerys is a reminder of Joan of Arc. Or of Boudica, the great British rebel against the Romans who rallies her people to fight for their freedom. Boudica was not averse to using violence against civilians: She burns down the Roman capital of Londinium, after all.



As giant companies such as Apple and Disney continue to dramatically announce the details of their new streaming services, only two pressing questions really matter: What exactly is the product, and how much does it cost? The March keynote for Apple TV+ barely answered the first query and ignored the second, broadly promising big-ticket TV with major stars. Intentionally or not, Disney’s recent demonstration of its forthcoming online powerhouse, the similarly titled Disney+, felt pointed in its attention to detail: Chairman Bob Iger is promising a database of hundreds of hours of TV and movies, old and new, for $6.99 a month.

Had Iger gone out onstage last week and announced just the monthly subscription cost (an annual fee will be $69.99, working out to $5.83 a month), the presentation still would’ve probably counted as a success. Netflix’s and Amazon’s status at the top of the streaming heap isn’t going to change anytime soon—Netflix boasts 139 million subscribers worldwide and Amazon has more than 100 million, with their closest competitor, Hulu, quite far behind at 25 million. Disney is a late entrant to the world of online-only media, and so, like Apple, it’s making an argument rooted in prestige, announcing new shows and films that are part of big brands such as Marvel, Star Wars, and Pixar. But unlike Apple, Disney also has a massive archive to roll out alongside that new material, which will guarantee a wider audience base.

Among the projects in the works for the November launch of Disney+ are a show called The Mandalorian, a sci-fi Western of sorts set in the Star Wars universe; a laboriously titled mockumentary series called High School Musical: The Musical: The Series; and a docuseries hosted by Jeff Goldblum. Original movies will include a live-action, CGI-heavy remake of Lady and the Tramp and a Christmas-themed comedy starring Anna Kendrick called Noelle. But there’s far more to Disney’s plans for its big media properties. More Star Wars shows are in the pipeline (including one centered on Diego Luna’s character, Cassian Andor, from Rogue One), while Marvel heroes including Loki, Scarlet Witch, Vision, the Falcon, and the Winter Soldier will get various spin-off programs.

For superfans of those titles, the prospect of dedicated shows will probably be enough to justify a $7 monthly charge. Another fledgling streaming service, CBS All Access, has attracted subscribers by focusing on being the exclusive purveyor of new Star Trek shows. The success of the company’s launch program, Star Trek: Discovery, helped CBS reach its goal of 8 million users two years early (and now more Star Trek shows are on the way). Fortunately for Disney, Marvel and Star Wars have similarly devoted fan bases. It also appears that Disney+ will be a home for films that, in years past, would’ve been solid, mid-budget family offerings at the cinema, including Julia Hart’s adaptation of the novel Stargirl, a family comedy called Magic Camp, and planned remakes of Peter Pan and The Sword in the Stone. Now that Disney’s theatrical strategy is focused entirely on giant blockbusters, Disney+ will exist for projects less guaranteed to post an impressive opening weekend.

The biggest advantage Disney+ has over its emerging rivals, however, is the archives. The company will be ending its fabled “Disney vault” approach to its animated library—a strategy by which the studio allowed only a rotating group of titles to be available for purchase at any one time. Disney+ will now serve as the home for all the studio’s films (about 500 titles), and its catalog will only grow as individual deals with streaming companies such as Netflix expire. For families with younger children, that trove of animated entertainment (combined with about 7,500 episodes of Disney TV shows) could easily be worth the monthly cost. That’s all before you even consider Disney’s newest acquisition, 20th Century Fox, which has its own vast cinematic library and major properties such as Avatar and The Simpsons (the latter’s entire episode archive will be available on Disney+).

For Disney, the appeal of this new venture is twofold. A streaming service has come to be an essential part of any big media company’s offerings (WarnerMedia is working on a similar bundled product of its own). But companies such as Netflix have also benefited from licensing Disney titles for their own streaming libraries; as those rights lapse, those movies will vanish, and Netflix will be forced to rely more heavily on its own original content. It’s exactly why every major tech company has been pouring money into original television and film: to prepare for the approaching landscape of à la carte online viewing. Consumers will have to pick which services seem most worth the monthly price to them, and the better the archive, the more valuable the commitment.



The change came after a September decision by the World Surf League that male and female competitors would be paid equitably in all WSL events. The top-tier pro-surf tour is now one of the only U.S.-based sports requiring equal pay for men and women.

The move was long overdue. Prior to the decision, in 2018, the 36 male surfers on WSL’s World Championship Tour were competing for $607,800 in prize money, while the 18 women on tour competed for just $303,900. The league’s reasoning for these amounts was that the average earnings between male and female surfers were the same—which they were—but the allocation of prize money wasn’t broken down evenly. So when Stephanie Gilmore won the 2018 Rip Curl Pro, she earned $65,000 for her victory, while Italo Ferreira got $100,000 for his.

Income earned for a majority of the league’s top female athletes comes exclusively from competitions and sponsorship deals. However, the move for equal pay might be most crucial for young, aspiring female surfers on the World Qualifying Series, where surfers compete in various events to earn points that could lead to a spot on the prestigious (and well-paid) World Championship Tour. Many surfers on the series don’t have big-time sponsorship deals yet and rely heavily on prize money and their own savings to fund their efforts. With larger purses to compete for now, female surfers will likely be encouraged to pursue surfing as a professional sport, knowing that the financial cost of their attempts to reach the championship tour will be less daunting.

This decision by the league should be lauded, but it also took something of a perfect storm for it to finally act. The fight to rid pro surfing of pay inequality only started to gain ground over the past few years, when a number of high-profile women surfers, and organizations such as the Committee for Equity in Women’s Surfing, began to shed light on the sport’s sexist culture, which infects everything from its competitive structure to profitable sponsorship deals.

In a 2017 op-ed for The Guardian, the seven-time world champion Layne Beachley described how from her first days of learning to surf to her years on the pro circuit in the 1990s, she and other women were heavily harassed, discriminated against, and paid a fraction of what their men competitors earned. “I was teased, cut off, told to get out of the water because I was a girl, advised that girls don’t surf, and to go mind the towel on the beach,” Beachley wrote of her early years surfing. “These encounters taught me to stand up and fight for what I believed in.”

And in a 2016 piece on Australia’s ABC, the former pro surfer Rebecca Woods detailed how she was dropped by her sponsor Billabong because, she said, they favored surfers who wore bikinis and looked like models.

The Committee for Equity in Women’s Surfing successfully lobbied California state officials to force the hands of organizers at Mavericks—an iconic big-wave surf contest in Northern California—to include a women’s division in 2017. Then last year, the CEWS set their sights on the WSL, challenging the league publicly to change its long history of gender discrimination against women. The organization’s efforts were bolstered when a viral image circulated of two teen surfers holding first-place prize checks that they won in the same competition, with the male surfer earning double.

Meet your 2018 Billabong Junior Series Ballito Pro Junior winners, Rio Waida (Indonesia) and Zoe Steyn (East London, SA)...

Shortly after the end of the 2018 tour, the WSL finally capitulated and announced late last year that all prize money from placing in a competition will be equal for men and women competitors (the league said that the move was not sudden, and that it had been pushing for equality “for years”). In addition, the league announced the Rising Tides–WSL Girls Program, an all-female surf clinic taking place at every championship-tour stop this year. The surf spot will be cleared out just for young athletes to surf with pro female surfers on the tour.

Plenty of work still needs to be done, though. Most media outlets celebrating these changes missed that the league didn’t make it mandatory that a women’s division be included in all events on the World Championship Tour. Sure enough, on this year’s schedule, there is no women’s division for the competition at Teahupo’o in Tahiti, where last year’s winner, Gabriel Medina, took home a $100,000 check.

The disparity persists on the WSL’s World Qualifying Series, where there are 64 events for men on the tour and only 44 for women. This means that male competitors are given more opportunities to earn points and qualify. The league also doesn’t control all WQS-sanctioned events where surfers can earn points, making prize money inequity still possible even under the general WSL banner. This loophole garnered some negative attention during the Jack’s Surfboards Pro in Huntington Beach, California, this past March, where 1,500 qualifying points and a $5,000 check were offered as the prize to the winner, Crosby Colapinto, in a competition that was all male. Organizers of the events cited a lack of time to organize as the reason women were excluded from the contests.

To Sabrina Brennan, a co-founder of CEWS, these instances are examples of the work that still needs to be done for equality in surfing. “Obviously, we are happy with the equal pay among men and women,” Brennan explained to me. “But getting the women’s division in competitions for us was the foundation of these efforts. There are a lot of ways that people get out of paying women athletes prize money, and one is to not include women. We want to make it clear that this shouldn’t be allowed to continue.”

One such effort is a California bill requiring equal pay for any competitive event held on coastal state property that has a prize and includes more than just a male division of competitors. Even one-off surf competitions and lower-level surf leagues would have to follow suit if an event is held on a state beach. Assembly member Tasha Boerner Horvath, who introduced the bill, cited CEWS’s work as inspiration. However, the proposed bill still doesn’t require a women’s division in every competition; CEWS is fighting to get this stipulation added. The proposed amendment has already influenced other movements to include similar requirements for competitions on any type of state land needing a lease.

CEWS is also active outside of California in Hawaii, a hotbed for cultivating pro surfers and where some of the world’s most famous surf breaks exist. The organization has been advocating for women’s divisions in all surf competitions in the state. And while Brennan’s focus is mainly on surfing, she believes it’s possible that the league’s decision could eventually have a major impact on other U.S. sports down the road. “If we can do it right in California,” Brennan said, “then that would make the case that might pressure Hawaii and others to get their act together.”



When Christina Hendricks first read the script for Good Girls, she was certain the gutsy story—about three Detroit moms who turn to crime to make ends meet—would get neutered by NBC. A broadcast network, the actor explained at a panel, meant constraints, constraints that could dull daring programming. “My big fear was that it was on network television,” she said. “I was terrified that they were just not going to allow the real rawness of it.”

Good Girls, which wraps its second season on Sunday, was indeed a rather bold choice for a network that prefers dramas such as the wholesome This Is Us and procedurals set in Chicago. The story follows three women—Beth (Hendricks), a steely mother of four; Annie (Mae Whitman), Beth’s little sister and a single mom; and Ruby (Retta), their happily married best friend with two kids—who, at a loss over how else to solve their various crippling financial troubles, decide to rob a supermarket in a heist that attracts the attention of a local gang.

It’s a log line that didn’t seem like it would yield multiple seasons, let alone one. But over the past two years, Good Girls has kept the story wheel turning while also quietly challenging the network-TV status quo. (Though it has struggled with low ratings, the series reportedly does well on Netflix, which helped it earn a third-season renewal last month.) Complicated antiheroes, audacious plotting, and inventive camerawork don’t often live outside of cable and streaming, and yet Good Girls makes it work.

When the show began in early 2018, its premise led critics to call it a “gentler” and feminist version of Breaking Bad. Those comparisons worked decently back then: Season 1 treated the women’s plight breezily—as breezily as a show introducing a trigger-happy neighborhood crime boss named Rio (Manny Montana) could, at least. There were zingers (“Aw, you guys didn’t hit me up to do brunch?” Rio teases when the women ask him for some face time), mommy jokes (criminal activities are basically bake sales, no?), and the occasional wig.

Season 2, however? Not really gentle anymore—and much less network TV–friendly. The series is interested in showing not just the messy consequences of the women’s criminal actions, but also the difficulties they face trying to hold on to their moral center. This year, they nearly committed murder—and their decision not to kill Boomer (David Hornsby), the slimy supermarket manager who threatened to rat them out to the FBI, comes back to haunt them. In last weekend’s penultimate episode, the women realized that they had accidentally disposed of an innocent stranger’s body—a task they performed in the first place because of their failure to kill Boomer. (In Breaking Bad terms, they’d chosen a half measure.) Now they have an extra corpse, the still-alive Boomer to take care of, and the feds on their tail anyway. The show leans in to the challenge of being good: The more the women try to maintain normal lives—Annie has started calling their criminal activity “extracurriculars” to downplay it—the worse things get.

If Good Girls has become a more fascinating show by digging into and raising questions about morality, it has also, this season, more deeply probed the costs of female ambition. Since discovering her talent for crime, Beth has developed an appetite for a more thrilling existence. She seduces Rio and takes control of her husband Dean’s business. But her drive doesn’t go unpunished: The neighborhood moms become threatened by her self-assuredness. Dean (Matthew Lillard), feeling emasculated by his wife’s success, lashes out and takes the kids away. By the back half of the season, Beth feels trapped: She craves more than the life she thought she wanted, but wanting more hurts the life she built. Looks like women just can’t ever, you know, have it all—the kids, the career, and the crime ring.

Ruby and Annie, too, have had deeper, meatier arcs this year. Ruby comes close to betraying her friends, while her husband, Stan (Reno Wilson), compromises his job as a cop by tampering with evidence to protect her. Toward the end of the season, he gets arrested and handcuffed in front of his and Ruby’s daughter, who now no longer looks up to him. Annie, meanwhile, gets romantically involved with her ex-husband and loses her child Sadie’s trust. She wins it back just in time: Sadie (Isaiah Stannard), in a tender scene, comes out as a transgender boy—a groundbreaking moment for trans representation, especially for network TV.

That’s not to say the show has stopped being comedic. If anything, it’s amped up its gallows humor, supplementing it with visually striking sequences. During a job Ruby and Annie try to pull off on their own, the camera lingers on them as they sit in the front of a school bus—yes, they attempt it while chaperoning a Girl Scouts trip—capturing the tension in a nerve-racking shot that ends only when Ruby blurts out a confession. When Beth, after angering Rio, starts receiving a severed body part in the mail each morning, the show makes a brilliant scene of her reaction: Her daily destruction of the package in the kitchen sink’s trash compactor is edited to become more unnerving each time, underlining Beth’s frustration and horror at having to dispose of an appendage before her kids are awake.

In a way, Good Girls has created a genre all its own. Led by the showrunner Jenna Bans (Scandal), the series is neither crime drama nor black comedy, but something in between. It’s a strong character study of three flawed women challenging what’s right and what’s wrong, what’s good and what’s bad. Beth, Ruby, and Annie are being recognized—and rewarded, via mounds of cash—for their resourcefulness, and they like it. It’s like a twisted notion of self-care: By moonlighting as criminals, they scratch an itch they can’t in their daily lives. It’s not like Beth’s four kids thank her every morning for making breakfast, packing their lunch, and baking hundreds of cupcakes for their classroom social.

Maybe a clue to the show’s casual rebellion was in the pitch process to NBC, which was apparently quite easy. It probably helped that Bans met with women executives who could presumably grasp the characters’ tricky motivations. (“I think I got three sentences in before [the then–NBC exec] Jen Salke screamed, ‘We have to do this!’” Bans told Variety.) Maybe they understood Beth, Ruby, and Annie’s urge to defer to their id. Maybe they saw the show as a guilty pleasure, and didn’t see it becoming something a little more subversive than that. Whatever the reason, Good Girls is, so far, proving its worth.



This story contains spoilers through Season 8, Episode 1 of Game of Thrones.

“I used to think you were the cleverest man alive.”

Sansa Stark may as well have been speaking for the audience as she dissed Tyrion Lannister during Game of Thrones’ Season 8 premiere. In a show full of schemers, Tyrion’s ruses once not only had a tendency to work, but also carried an element of righteousness: He was smart, and he was good. He smoked out a rat in King’s Landing; he wheedled himself and others out of bullies’ chains and prison cells; he engineered a special riding saddle for Bran. “My brother has his sword, and I have my mind,” Tyrion said to a sullen new ally in Season 1. “And a mind needs books like a sword needs a whetstone. That’s why I read so much, Jon Snow.”

Maybe he’s stopped reading. Sansa dismisses him as not so clever in this recent episode due to his belief that Cersei Lannister, the most venal and cruel ruler in Westeros, would keep her vow to help her enemies, the Targaryens and the Starks, defeat the army of the undead. In the previous season’s finale, this promise was revealed as a bluff nearly as soon as it was made, with Cersei spelling out her obvious, self-interested logic in private to Jaime, the brother she loves. No one should be more familiar with that sort of logic than the brother she’s long despised. Yet Tyrion has fallen for her ruse and persuaded Queen Daenerys to stake her armies on it.

It’s the latest in a line of blunders. My colleague Chris Orr listed them in his Season 8 preview: “Tyrion hasn’t had a good idea in seasons now (truce with the slaver cities? sneak attack on Casterly Rock? let’s go snatch a zombie?).” Each of these wasn’t a mere dicey gamble whose upsides were mixed with downsides. They each backfired terribly, with consequences for his new queen, Daenerys, and the cause of liberation and world-saving she’s thought to represent. She’s lost soldiers, cities, and a dragon on his account.

He, in turn, has lost not only his cunning, but also his place within the show’s hierarchy of characters. In the first few seasons, Tyrion could nearly be thought of as the protagonist. He defended his life and his principles in the face of his family’s villainous plotting and the prejudices he faced for being born a dwarf. That arc saw him bonding with other underestimated sorts—Bran, Jon, Sansa—while trying to curb the excesses of the entitled Joffrey, Cersei, and Tywin. His family marked him for death; he took his horrible father’s life; he escaped by getting smuggled across the sea in a crate. But since bursting out of that box—seemingly a moment of final liberation from the Lannister yoke—he’s held an oddly diminished place on the show.

Part of the problem must be that he’s a mere adviser now, so he’s helping rather than driving action. That doesn’t explain why his advice is bad, though. Thrones has repeatedly showed that Tyrion’s instincts have been faltering, but it hasn’t offered up a theory for why. Maybe it’s been hinting at one, though: love.

In the Season 7 finale, Tyrion skulked outside the door while Daenerys and Jon consummated their love. It looked like he was jealous—and indeed, information in the official Game of Thrones scripts as well as an interview with the actor Peter Dinklage basically confirm that Tyrion has a crush on her. This crush might result in plot complications as Jon and Daenerys’s relationship and loyalties are tested in episodes to come. But perhaps it explains Tyrion’s general glumness so far in Season 8. On the ramparts of Winterfell, he, Davos, and Varys look down on Jon and Dany. Davos proposes that the two leaders should get married for the good of the realm. Tyrion has only this to offer: “They do make a handsome couple.”

If Tyrion is resentful of Jon and Dany, a comment like that one—about appearance—might indicate that it’s resentment tied to his status as physically different from others. Jon and Dany originally appealed to him as friends because they, too, were underdogs—a bastard and an exiled sex slave—who’d worked to transcend their lot. By now, the two of them are royalty, lovebirds, and dragon riders. Tyrion is on the sidelines, kvetching with two other advisory figures who, in their way, are phenotypically marginalized, too. Davos is an old man—much older than Tyrion, as Tyrion goes out of his way to point out. Varys is a eunuch (unlike Tyrion, as Tyrion, again, goes out of his way to point out).

The very first dialogue of Season 8, indeed, hints that Tyrion’s been stewing on bodies and marginality. Tyrion quips that Varys doesn’t have balls to freeze off, to which Varys poses this: “You take great offense at dwarf jokes, but love telling eunuch jokes. Why is that?” Tyrion’s response: “Because I have balls, and you don’t.” It’s a juvenile punch line, but you could read more into it: an assertion of his virility. That assertion takes on an especially acidic edge with the knowledge that he’s been feeling like a third wheel to the most important, blossoming affair in the realm.

One could then speculate that jealousy informed some of his botched schemes. The mission to grab a Wight endangered Jon, and Tyrion counseled against Dany going to save him. The truce with Cersei—secured in a private meeting between the two Lannister siblings after Jon’s unwillingness to lie about his loyalties derailed the negotiation—would seem to have shored up Tyrion’s value to Dany. 

But the odd thing about this reading is that throughout the eight seasons, viewers were never led to think of Tyrion as petty. Tywin once called him a “spiteful little creature full of envy, lust, and low cunning,” and even if that description drew on a kernel of truth, Tyrion’s actions have repeatedly shown how conscientiousness can sit alongside and even be powered by baser traits. If he’s been poisoned by envy—for Dany’s love, and for the heroic agency Jon has been able to access lately—it’s a sad and somewhat inexplicable turn for a beloved character. The show hasn’t earned it.

Of course, the malaise that appears to be swamping Tyrion may well turn out to be one last obstacle in a valiant journey. Transcendence, or sacrifice in the name of love and country, could be on the way. But there’s a possibility of darker tragedy. Cersei has dispatched Tyrion’s old buddy Bronn to assassinate both Lannister brothers, and it’s exactly the kind of evil plot that Tyrion once would have been able to foresee and thwart. But his mind seems clouded lately. Is it so impossible that a crossbow bolt may end up in his broken heart?



In the summer of 1962, MCA Inc.—the giant Hollywood talent agency so dominant in its field that industry insiders called it The Octopus—acquired a majority stake in Decca Records and Universal Pictures, giving it control of a full-fledged movie studio and a major recording company. For the better part of a decade, MCA had already been the country’s largest creator of television programming. The agency was known for controversially “packaging” its star actors with writing and directing clients into ready-made shows for one-stop, near-monopoly sale to the networks.

But the Universal acquisition was a bridge too far for Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department, which filed a civil antitrust suit against MCA and forced it to dissolve its agency business, on the grounds that being both a buyer and seller of talent posed an inherent conflict of interest. For most of the past 60 years, mindful of this precedent, Hollywood’s agents have largely steered clear of trying to produce movies and television that would give them control of the content that their own clients create.

Not anymore.

In recent years, powerful über-agents like William Morris Endeavor’s Ari Emanuel have realized what the legendary MCA boss Lew Wasserman himself understood so well when he agreed to get out of the agency business: Producing and owning entertainment is ultimately more lucrative than simply taking up to a 10 percent commission on its creation. That’s why the big agencies have not only reverted to The Octopus’s old practice of bundling their clients into package deals for movies and television—in the process, waiving their standard commissions while pocketing hefty (and often undisclosed) fees for themselves—but also created independent production companies that could amount to mini-studios of their own.

Now the Writers Guild of America is fighting back. The union represents about 13,000 screenwriters—some 8,500 of whom have agents—and it provides them with health and pension benefits and advocates for writers’ interests with studios and producers. Last week, the guild sued the four biggest talent agencies—WME, Creative Artists Agency, ICM Partners, and United Talent Agency—on the grounds that their packaging practices violate California and federal laws by pitting the financial interests of the agencies against those of their clients. The union also instructed its members to fire their agents after failed negotiations on a new industry code of conduct to replace the compact that governs how agents represent writers. The WGA says that 92 percent of its more than 800 members—including Saturday Night Live’s Tina Fey and Adam McKay, and House of Cards’ Beau Willimon—who signed a statement in support of ending packaging fees last month have complied.

“This is incredibly painful,” one veteran television writer who signed the union’s letter firing his longtime agent told me, speaking on condition of anonymity. “This is chaos. I’ve been with my agent for 23 years and he’s a good friend of mine, and he’s shown nothing but integrity and commitment for 23 years. To sign something terminating that, even though we know it’s a labor move and part of a larger dance that hopefully gets some resolution, it’s a very disconcerting thing.”

At the moment, the two sides seem locked in a standoff with no end in sight, in a battle that could ultimately upend television and movie production and threaten the livelihoods of thousands of people. This conflict comes at a time when fundamental economic realities are changing for both writers and agents in the digital Hollywood era, pitting their interests against each other in new ways.

The period of peak TV has meant more content creation—and perhaps a greater need for writers than ever before. But it has also meant shorter production seasons, lower salaries, less predictable work cycles and, in the case of Netflix, no potential back-end reward for the sales of successful shows to other markets (the streaming service retains ownership of all its original content). At the same time, the agency business has changed dramatically, as the big players have expanded and taken on capital from outside investors, lessening individual agents’ ownership stake in their business and requiring an ever-larger revenue stream to be profitable. It’s a perfect storm, one that will test whether prevailing industry practices draw renewed scrutiny by the Justice Department.

In recent years, the major agencies have taken in hundreds of millions of dollars in private-equity money—the majority owner of CAA, for example, is now TPG Capital, a giant private-equity firm—and their prime mandate is growth. Last month, The Wall Street Journal reported that WME is planning for an initial public stock offering this year. “They aren’t agencies any more, in their view,” one former top network executive told me. “They’re entertainment conglomerates.”

That is precisely the situation that the 1962 federal consent decree with MCA was intended to prevent. Founded in 1924 in Chicago by Dr. Jules Stein, an ophthalmologist, MCA initially booked bands into the Windy City’s Prohibition-era nightclubs and speakeasies, often in peaceful collaboration with the city’s mobsters. By 1939, it had moved to Beverly Hills and acquired other talent agencies representing stars such as Bette Davis and Henry Fonda, with the leadership of Wasserman, a former theater usher from Cleveland who became Stein’s right-hand man. As an agent in postwar Hollywood, Wasserman revolutionized prevailing industry practices by getting the first-ever back-end percentage deal for James Stewart in Winchester ’73. In the 1950s, MCA moved into television production with its Revue Productions arm.

MCA was able to do so in part because the agency received a friendly waiver from the Screen Actors Guild, then headed by Ronald Reagan, and from the Writers Guild as well. By the end of the decade, the agency held a virtual stranglehold on TV production, to the exasperation of network executives. Sylvester “Pat” Weaver, the onetime head of NBC’s entertainment division (and the father of Sigourney), explained to Justice Department investigators what happened when the network wanted to develop a new series starring Phil Silvers, an MCA client.

“We had production facilities; top scripts, writers, and directors; our own production facilities in Burbank,” Weaver would recall. “All we wanted was a star. MCA agreed to furnish us Phil Silvers, but only if it took a package commission: 10 percent from every producer, director, writer … everyone who worked on the show. If we protested that we wanted our own writers because the best ones were not MCA clients, MCA would simply say, ‘That’s the deal. That’s the way it’s got to be.’”

In the end, giving up the agency business wasn’t really a tough choice for Wasserman and Stein. By 1961, MCA’s gross revenues were about $82 million, according to Wasserman’s biographer, Connie Bruck, with the agency’s share only accounting for about 10 percent of that. As head of Universal, Wasserman would go on to create the studio’s lucrative back-lot tour, and would pioneer the summer blockbuster with films like Jaws.

The modern packaging system that has evolved over the past couple of decades is somewhat different. The agencies—often two or more together—waive standard commissions for their clients, who are lumped together on a particular project, while taking fees and back-end ownership stakes for themselves. The agents contend that this works in favor of the clients by saving them their 10 percent commission, and for some nonstar writers and actors, it may well do so. But the union complains that the system is not transparent, and that there is no way to know whether an agent might have negotiated a higher fee for a writer or performer in a nonpackaged deal.

David Simon, the creator of The Wire and Homicide: Life on the Street, recently wrote an impassioned blog post, reprinted on Deadline, about the inherent conflict that packaging presents:

The problem is that the agency incentive to package shows and provide larger payments to themselves has obliterated any serious thought about aggressively negotiating on behalf of any writer, or actor, or director, large or small. Why bother to fight for 10 percent of a few dollars more for this story editor or that co-executive producer when to NOT do so means less freight on the operating budgets of the projects that you yourself hope to profit from? Why serve your clients as representatives with a fiduciary responsibility and get the last possible dollar for them, when you stand to profit by splitting the proceeds of a production not with labor, but with management—the studios who are cutting you in on the back end? Why put your client’s interest in direct opposition to your own?

The WGA is seeking an injunction in Los Angeles Superior Court. It would prevent agencies from accepting packaging fees, and seek damages from those fees it argues were obtained illegally. Union officials have said they do not yet know whether the guild would file a second suit seeking to block the agencies’ moves into the production field, but a union lawyer told me the guild is looking at it. The agencies have mostly maintained silence. But attorneys for their trade group, the Association of Talent Agents, are contending that lawyers and managers assuming the negotiating responsibilities currently reserved expressly for agents would violate both New York and California state laws governing the industry.

Most experts seem to agree that the agencies are pushing the envelope in a gray area of the law. The MCA consent decree just covered a single company, and one that no longer exists, at that. The major talent agencies also hold considerable political clout, functioning as reliable fundraising ATMs for politicians by perennially hosting high-ticket dinners and parties for candidates from all over the country—especially liberal Democrats who might otherwise look askance at issues like packaging of entertainment. “State law is a little bit muddled as to what they’re allowed to do as agents,” says a senior lawyer at one major studio. “Even if you’re over the line, who has the balls to bring a lawsuit against them?” Well, the Writers Guild, for starters.



John Singleton, who died Monday at 51, made his mark on Hollywood very early on, when his debut movie, Boyz n the Hood, became a massive hit in the summer of 1991. Singleton, who was 23 at the time, would become the youngest filmmaker ever to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Director and the first African American to compete in the category.

Singleton also wrote the Oscar-nominated screenplay, and his coming-of-age story set in South Central Los Angeles resonated with audiences at a time when gangsta rap was going mainstream, making the harsh realities of life in “the hood” part of the national conversation.

Singleton steeped his film in hip-hop culture, immediately evident from the title. Those in the know would have recognized Boyz n the Hood as a nod to the debut single of Eazy-E, “The Boyz-N-The Hood,” recorded in 1987 as the first release put out by Ruthless Records. The song was also included on the compilation album N.W.A. and the Posse, which introduced the gangsta-rap pioneers N.W.A. The writing credit for the song actually belonged to another member of N.W.A.: Ice Cube, who would launch his acting career in Singleton’s movie.

By adapting the title of the song for his movie, Singleton was putting on display not just hip-hop culture, but also hip-hop orthography. Such unconventional spelling is a stylistic choice that scholars have identified as a key signifier in the forging of an anti-establishment identity in rap music. In a 2001 article, Warren Olivo argued that rappers have deployed nonstandard spelling as a way of subverting the “socio-cultural and linguistic hegemony,” positioning hip-hop culture as “anti-society.” Erik Nielson similarly argued in a 2010 study of the 2Pac song “Can’t C Me” from the album All Eyez on Me that the respelling of words in rap music is a way to “evade the codification of an otherwise elusive and inherently protective art form.”

Hip-hop spelling is often used to represent the distinct phonological features of African American English. As Marcyliena Morgan has observed, the “spelling ideology” behind these choices may reflect such features as syllable reduction (as in aight for all right or Ima for I’m gonna). Representing the word in as n—as in The Boyz-N-the Hood—is an example of such a reduction. But writing boys as boyz is a different kind of choice. Because the word boys ends with a /z/ sound in standard English, the respelling doesn’t indicate a deviation from a pronunciation norm. Rather, as Geneva Smitherman and John Baugh have argued in the case of phat (a playful respelling of fat to mean excellent), this orthographic divergence is “not by chance linguistic error” but a conscious subversion of standard English that plays into hip-hop identity formation.

Interestingly, despite the transgressive force of the respelling that Singleton used for the movie title, the use of z in the place of s has a long history in written English. We could go all the way back to Shakespeare’s time, when there was a popular trend of creating profane oaths of the form “God’s X,” as in God’s blood or God’s death. (Gadzooks is conjectured to come from God’s hooks, referring to the hooks used in the crucifixion of Jesus.) These oaths were euphemized by removing God from them, with the result typically spelled as ’sblood, ’sdeath, and so forth. But in the variable spelling of early modern English, z often appeared instead, as when Shakespeare had the character Falstaff exclaim “Zbloud!” in Henry IV, Part 1.

Even as English orthography became more standardized, the z-for-s substitution persisted, often to indicate nonstandard dialects. This kind of “eye dialect” is meant to alert the reader to something unconventional, rather than a careful transcription of a speaker’s pronunciation. After all, when the plural or possessive ending -s is attached to a noun that ends in a vowel sound (such as boy) or a voiced consonant (such as dog), the s is typically pronounced as if it were a z anyway.

Consider, for instance, the bit of dialect spelling printed in a Missouri newspaper in 1900, “Boyz vill be boyz.” Using vill for will is apparently intended to approximate the accented English of a German speaker. But boyz in that context does not represent a different pronunciation—instead, it just looks different. (In fact, German-inflected English would be more likely to change the pronunciation the other way, with the /z/ sound shifting to /s/ through what linguists call “final devoicing.”)

Spelling reformers have long sought to apply logic to English orthography, to bring it more into line with the phonetics of speech. In 1906, when the crusade for spelling reform was at its peak (with such luminaries as Theodore Roosevelt and Andrew Carnegie backing the effort), one newspaper advertisement for an Oregon clothier poked fun at the effort by writing the ad copy in “the Phonetic way,” changing “men’s and boy’s suits” to “menz and boyz suts.”

This kind of playful spelling took on new significance within the 1960s counterculture, especially in the music scene. Following the path of The Beatles, who changed a letter from beetles, many new bands tweaked the spelling of preexisting words, and that included changing the plural ending -s to -z. Thus, in 1966, a noisy band in New York City called themselves The Godz. Pittsburgh had The Jaggerz, and an Ohio band dubbed themselves The Boyz. (A hard-rock band in Los Angeles would also take the name The Boyz in the 1970s.) Meanwhile, some bands went further with unusual respellings, as when the British band Slade released their 1973 hit, “Cum on Feel the Noize” (later covered by Quiet Riot).

In the 1980s, R&B and funk acts (most famously Prince) used distinctive spelling for album and song titles. The “boyz” tradition was continued by an L.A.-based funk group called Skool Boyz. In the world of rap music, one of the biggest acts of the time was Heavy D & The Boyz, which put out its first release in 1987. After that, in the late ’80s and early ’90s, numerous other “boyz” emerged in hip-hop and R&B, most notably Philadelphia’s Boyz II Men (who took their name from the 1988 New Edition song “Boys to Men”).

While Singleton’s use of the letter z in Boyz n the Hood partook in this musical legacy, the same kind of respelling has emerged in other arenas of playful usage. Advertisers have used it for slogans—such as “Beanz Meanz Heinz,” a British tagline used by Heinz Baked Beans since the 1960s—or for product names, like the Trollz and Bratz dolls. As Leslie Savan observed in her book Slam Dunks and No-Brainers, since the ’90s, the z has been used to communicate a youthful edge, “to look hip-hop fresh,” though such appropriation has often flopped, such as when the Fox Family Channel launched the short-lived Boyz Channel and Girlz Channel in 1999.

Meanwhile, on the internet, the z-for-s substitution has been a hallmark of ironic leetspeak, as seen in such intentional misspellings as n00bz (for newbs, short for newbies”) or lulz (a variant of lols for laughs). While the -z ending may now seem rather played out, appropriate only for self-conscious parody, it’s worth remembering the summer of ’91, when Boyz n the Hood represented a jolt to the system, one administered by a young film director seeking to upset the norms, spelling included.



This article contains spoilers through Season 2, Episode 1 of Big Little Lies.

Guilt has always loomed over the women of Big Little Lies, even before they got away with murder. In its first season, HBO’s adaptation of Liane Moriarty’s best seller augmented the novel’s sharp observations about motherhood with an invented subplot following Madeline (Reese Witherspoon) and her efforts to put on a community-theater production of the controversial musical Avenue Q. She enlists Celeste (Nicole Kidman), a former lawyer, to help her persuade the mayor to allow the play to happen. When they succeed, they’re elated: As stay-at-home moms living in the affluent seaside city of Monterey, California, they rarely venture outside of family life. They realize they want, simply, “more.”

“I feel so ashamed for saying this, but being a mother, it’s not enough for me, it’s just not. It’s not even close,” Celeste tearily confesses afterwards while sitting in Madeline’s car. “It’s evil, right? I’m evil.” No, she’s not, Madeline responds—she feels the same way. “That made me feel alive, too,” she says about persuading the mayor. “I want more!” And then she honks the horn and screams. The scene is electrifying: two women finally voicing how suffocated they feel as mothers who can’t embrace motherhood as their primary identity—even if they can only admit their desires to each other inside the safety of Madeline’s car, insulated from the judgment of everyone else.

In Season 2, Mary Louise Wright (Meryl Streep), the mother of the murdered, abusive Perry (Alexander Skarsgård), arrives in Monterey, ostensibly to help Celeste cope with life as a widow. But she also seems acutely aware of Celeste and Madeline’s longing—and she knows how to use it to her advantage. Which makes her a fascinating threat: The beloved smothering mother—the “smother”—is nothing new, but in Streep’s hands, and on a show populated now by tormented characters weighed down by guilt, Mary Louise brings a welcome, wicked energy to the proceedings.

Just look at the way Madeline wilts in her presence in the second-season premiere, when Mary Louise almost immediately picks up on her existential dissatisfaction. “I find little people to be untrustworthy,” Mary Louise begins, in a singsongy voice that only Meryl Streep, she of the subdued line readings and Oscar-winning intensity, can pull off. “You seem like a nice person. Loving. But you also strike me as a ‘wanter.’”

Madeline freezes, so Mary Louise takes her sweet time sinking her (prosthetic) teeth into Madeline’s wounded ego. “There are people in life who content themselves with what they have, and then there are others who just …” She trails off. “Want. Oh, you don’t have to take it personally. I’m a ‘wanter’ myself.”

Sure, but Mary Louise’s wants are nothing like Madeline’s. Mary Louise wants answers about her son, wants everyone to mourn him, wants him back. Unlike Madeline and Celeste, she embraces her role as the grieving mother and dutiful grandmother—and she uses it as a Trojan horse for her villainy. Because underneath that soft-spoken demeanor is a woman capable of exploiting the insecurities and underlying guilt of the women her son knew. It’s an insidious form of cruelty packaged inside a well-meaning, maternal facade.

But thank goodness she’s there. Mary Louise’s terrifying, slightly unhinged presence has so far already elevated and validated the off-book second season. She’s a uniquely, craftily vicious enemy—a mix of Sharp Objects’ Adora and Game of Thrones’ Olenna, but with fine-tuned passive aggression instead of poison as her weapon. In her verbal sparring matches with Madeline, she sits while Madeline stands above her, but Mary Louise walks away from both of their exchanges on top. It’s not clear just yet why Madeline irks her so much; maybe she intuits that Madeline had something to do with Perry’s death, or maybe it’s the fact that Madeline has leaned into her wants (by embarking on a new career).

With Celeste, she’s even more malicious, picking at her shame—Celeste admits to her therapist that she still feels “responsible” for Perry’s death—and toying with her gratitude. At dinner, Mary Louise delivers a speech—inflected with her understanding of masculinity—to her grandchildren about feeling angry that their father’s not alive when lesser men (in her opinion, anyway) have survived. She ends her monologue with a blood-curdling, meme-launching, thoroughly disturbing scream to demonstrate how much she misses her son. Seeing Celeste’s shock, Mary Louise weaponizes her daughter-in-law’s reaction. “My grief is too loud for you,” she says. “Don’t you feel angry?” The question she doesn’t verbalize nonetheless lingers at the dinner table: What else could you possibly want, Celeste, she seems to wonder, than your husband, the father of your children, back? 

Mary Louise says she’s a “wanter” herself, but her wants are maternal, which in her mind makes them righteous ones. As the season continues, she’ll seek out other members of the “Monterey Five,” hoping not just to learn how Perry died, but also to change their minds about him. It’s ironic, really: The woman looking to expose the biggest secrets in Monterey appears unable to remove her own blinders.



To watch the Masters Tournament, held every spring at Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia, is to be caught between times. On the one hand, there is the usual 21st-century sports futurism, as in every golf tournament. Players are forever driving the ball farther with more refined equipment, the cameras that capture them do so in higher and higher definition, and tracing lines appear on-screen to track the flight of the ball. On the other hand, the Masters and its broadcast partners take pains to create the illusion that time’s forward march has been suspended, at least there. The same oversaturated shots of azaleas and pine trees appear annually, and announcers’ tranquil voices refer to the same scenes at Amen Corner and Butler Cabin. The patrons—not “fans,” pointedly—are barred from taking their cellphones onto the course.

On Sunday, the sense of temporal displacement was amplified by orders of magnitude. With a bogey putt on the 18th green that gave him a score of 13-under for the tournament, Tiger Woods won his fifth Masters and 15th major overall. At 43, he became the second-oldest winner in Masters history. It was his first victory at Augusta since 2005 and his first major title since 2008—before an infamous car crash, a public airing of the lurid details of his infidelity, four back surgeries, a DUI arrest, and numerous other ailments that threatened to permanently derail what once looked destined to be the most accomplished career in golf history. Asked to put the victory into words, Woods said, “Just unreal, to be honest with you … Winning [the first time] in ’97 and then come full circle 22 years later, to be able to do it again. This has meant so much to me and my family, this tournament, and to have everyone here, it’s something I’ll never, ever forget.” A chorus emerged, calling it one of the greatest comebacks in golf history.

Sunday’s round was captivating in its combination of familiarity and difference, the ways in which it held to and diverged from elements of the Tiger legend. Each of the previous 14 times Woods had lifted a major trophy, he had entered the final day with at least a share of the lead; his reputation was for hope-snuffing dominance, not come-from-behind heroics. This time, he began his day—at the unusually early hour of 9:20 a.m. ET, to get ahead of an approaching storm—two strokes behind the leader, Francesco Molinari. At his peak, Woods was the unquestioned best athlete on the course, his strength allowing him to launch drives other players could only chuckle at. Down the stretch on Sunday, he found himself followed by Brooks Koepka, Dustin Johnson, and Tony Finau on the leaderboard, young bombers (and Woods acolytes) who all beat his driving numbers.

The pivotal moment—and maybe, for those inclined to look for it, proof of aged wisdom—came on the 12th hole, a short par-3 with the green lying just beyond a ribbon of water. As many of his main competitors—Koepka, Ian Poulter, Molinari, and Finau—dumped their shots in the creek, Woods lofted his safely onto the middle of the green. It was hardly a highlight in and of itself, setting up as it did a ho-hum two-putt for par, but as the other scores climbed, it gave Woods a share of the lead he would never relinquish. “It helps to be experienced,” he said of his thought process. “That’s all I was concentrating on. Don’t be fooled.”

More conventionally Tiger-esque displays followed. Woods made birdies on the par-5 13th and 15th: smashed drives, clean approaches, it might have been the year 2000. On the par-3 16th, the lead now his alone, he hit a tee shot that felt like a souvenir for the delighted crowd. Using his 8-iron, he spun the ball far past the flagstick and into a ridge that fed it back; it rolled within a foot of the hole and settled within two for an easy birdie putt.

After the tap-in on 18 made the win official, celebration came from all corners. Woods threw his arms in the air and then walked off the green to hug his family. The crowd roared. Former Masters winners put on their green jackets and lined up to congratulate him. Stephen Curry, Serena Williams, and Tom Brady tweeted their praise. Woods’s history has not been a wholly noble one, of course—the sight of his daughter and son was a reminder of the real human stakes attached to the past decade’s tabloid fervor—but on Sunday it hit the last big beat of the American comeback story, and the country indulged.

As Woods walked off the 18th green, CBS’s Jim Nantz did the announcer’s duty and looked forward to approaching majors, the PGA Championship and the U.S. Open, held at courses where Woods has won before. It seemed for a moment as if the past 11 years hadn’t happened, as if a mothballed trajectory could be dusted off again. The power of this performance, though, was that it wasn’t that; it was something else. Back on the ninth, when Woods still trailed, a poor approach shot had left him with a 70-foot birdie attempt. He tapped the ball and looped it down a dangerous decline, over 20 long seconds, to within inches of the cup. It was a virtuosic putt, but one that, 15 years ago, observers would have been disappointed not to see drop—a missed opportunity for magic. On Sunday, they went wild. Things are different now.



When Donald Trump tweeted Thursday morning that Democrats “have gone absolutely ‘Loco,’” the most surprising thing about it was that he had never called anyone loco on Twitter before.

There was a time last fall when Trump couldn’t stop using the Spanish loanword for crazy in speeches and interviews. As the Factba.se database of presidential statements reveals, from late September to early November, Trump used loco at no fewer than 10 different events. Most of the time it appeared in his rambling stump speeches supporting Republicans in the midterm elections. He kicked things off on September 29 in Wheeling, West Virginia, when he said of Democrats, “These people are—they’ve gone crazy; they’ve gone loco.” Perhaps pleased by the reaction the word got, he came back to it later in the same speech, referring to critics of his meeting with the North Korean leader Kim Jong Un: “They don’t know what to do. It’s driving them crazy, they’re loco, it’s driving them crazy.”

He kept up the loco theme at campaign stops in Tennessee, Minnesota, Kansas, Nevada, Missouri, and Indiana, wielding it against unnamed foes in party politics and the media. At a news conference on October 1, he said of the press: “They’re worse now than ever. They’re loco, but that’s okay. I put up with it.” And on October 10, in an interview with Shannon Bream on Fox News, he went after the Federal Reserve Bank for raising interest rates: “The Fed is going loco and there’s no reason for them to do it.”

But after the midterms, Trump seemed to tire of the adjective, until he broke it out again this week on Twitter. The on-again, off-again pattern resembles his infatuation with another Spanish borrowing: hombres. Trump famously warned of “some bad hombres” coming across the Mexican border in a debate with Hillary Clinton in 2016, and he continued inveighing against “hombres” who were variously “bad” or “tough” or “rough” as part of his alarmist campaign rhetoric on border security. But the word did not join his Twitter repertoire until last month, when he tweeted, “The bad ‘hombres,’ of which there are many, are being detained & will be sent home.” By putting hombres in quotation marks, he was perhaps signaling its foreignness, while at the same time self-consciously quoting his own memorable usage from the debate three years ago. (In Thursday’s loco tweet, the word was both bracketed by quotation marks and capitalized, a one-two punch of Trumpian emphasis.)

Trump’s use of hombres and loco illustrates what the late linguistic anthropologist Jane Hill termed “Mock Spanish,” an anglophone appropriation of Spanish words that, she argued, can serve as “a site for the indexical reproduction of racism in American English.” In her 2008 book, The Everyday Language of White Racism, Hill presented “tough hombre” as an example of “Cowboy Anglo Spanish” that persisted from early frontier usage thanks to reinforcement in Western movies—no doubt how Trump was exposed to the word hombres.

When Trump referred to “bad hombres” in the 2016 debate, Adam Schwartz, a specialist in Spanish-language education at Oregon State University, wrote that “Donald Trump just made it a hell of a lot easier for me—and for all of us who teach about language, race and racism—to talk with students about Mock Spanish and the power of covert racist discourse.” Schwartz observed that while “hombre itself might not be a racial slur,” Trump’s use of it crystalized “the scope of that word’s injury, its offensiveness, its oppressive potential.”

As for loco, it too represents a remnant of English-Spanish linguistic contact along the western and southwestern frontier. According to Cowboy Talk: A Dictionary of Spanish Terms From the American West by Robert M. Smead, the word goes back to 1844 in American English, used in conjunction with locoweed, a poisonous plant that caused a distemper in cattle called loco or locoism. Like hombre, it was kept alive in the limited lexicon of anglicized Spanish found in cowboy movies.

Jane Hill noted in her book that loco has exemplified one pattern of Mock Spanish, the euphemistic substitution of “vulgar” English words with “insulting, lewd, or scatological” Spanish equivalents. She observed that it could be used for political name-calling in conjunction with other typical Mock Spanish elements, such as the article el and the suffix -o, as when Rush Limbaugh called the former Democratic congressional leader Dick Gephardt “El loco poco Dicko.”

For Trump, loco fits into his own pejorative arsenal when caricaturing the mental instability of his rivals. He has used crazy in his nicknames for various Democratic leaders (Joe Biden, Nancy Pelosi, Bernie Sanders, Maxine Waters) and for members of the media (Jim Acosta, Mika Brzezinski, Maureen Dowd, Megyn Kelly). The -o ending comes out in the Trumpian use of psycho (for Joe Scarborough and Bette Midler) as well as wacko (for Sanders, Pelosi, and others). While loco provides a Mock Spanish spin, it is clearly of a piece with these other “crazy”-sounding epithets. And it just could be yet another kind of “I’m rubber, you’re glue” projection used by Trump as a defense mechanism whenever his own mental fitness comes into question.



There is a sub-sub-genre of film that I have an extreme, long-standing weakness for: If your movie is about working-class Brits living in a tough part of town and struggling to express themselves artistically, I am almost certainly going to like it. In Tom Harper’s Wild Rose, Rose-Lynn Harlan (played by Jessie Buckley) is a 20-something Glaswegian who was recently released from prison, is struggling to raise two young children, and dreams of only one thing: singing country music and becoming a Nashville star. Just as with Billy Elliot and his ballet dreams, or the embittered miner musicians of Brassed Off, or the grumpy cobblers of Kinky Boots, I was enraptured from the get-go.

Crucial to any of these films is a lead performance that can capture both the shine of the hero’s aspirations and the grind of day-to-day life. Buckley, an Irish stage and TV actor who has just begun her transition into movies, supercharges Wild Rose with electrifying purpose, adding flair and substance to the screenwriter Nicole Taylor’s routine but solid script about a diamond in the rough. I wasn’t rooting for Rose-Lynn to succeed merely because that’s what these stories require; I was also just desperate to watch her sing as many times as possible.

Harper is a journeyman filmmaker whose screen credits include the Brit horror knockoff The Woman in Black 2 and the BBC adaptation of War & Peace (also starring Buckley). He presents Glasgow as flat and gray, all the better to make the redheaded Buckley pop as she returns to the city after a year in jail. The first chunk of the film tracks her departing the prison in high spirits, hooking up with an old boyfriend, then picking up her two children from their disapproving grandmother, Marion (Julie Walters). She picks a fight at the local bar where she used to perform, gets a job as a cleaning lady for the well-off Susannah (Sophie Okonedo), and even has a close call with the cops over her 7 p.m. curfew. Almost 40 minutes pass, and viewers hear multiple times about how Rose-Lynn has been singing since she was 14, before we see her take the stage for the first time.

All that buildup pays off, though. When Rose-Lynn finally storms back into her local bar and sings Chris Stapleton’s “Outlaw State of Mind,” the movie opens up. Buckley bubbles with charisma without losing a grip on her character, evincing a woman who’s only really herself when she’s singing. One song should be enough to convince the audience that Rose-Lynn is worthy of Nashville superstardom, but like any good hard-bitten British melodrama, Wild Rose has a healthy dose of reality to weigh her down. Rose-Lynn’s dreams clash with the difficulty of her family life, the lingering effects of her criminal past, and her inability to stick with anything long enough to make a career out of it. She’s raw, boiling talent—which is part of why the relatively unknown Buckley (who also played a crucial role in this year’s TV hit Chernobyl) is so well cast.

Walters, who played the encouraging but flinty dance teacher in Billy Elliot, is an old hand at these sorts of films, and she infuses Marion with just the right amount of love and despair for her daughter’s wild ways. As a wealthy woman who genuinely adores Rose-Lynn’s singing but who can be painfully patronizing about it, Okonedo has an even narrower path to tread, but the Oscar-nominated actor shows her subtle knack for getting quickly to the heart of even a minor supporting character like this one.

The real delight of Wild Rose, though, is how delicately it finds a narrative that rewards Rose-Lynn’s obvious skill without succumbing to easy tropes about how natural talent and fame go hand in hand. That Rose-Lynn is an onstage force is easy to tell from the second she picks up a microphone, but Taylor makes this film less about her gift than about the maturity she needs to take it beyond the local Glasgow pubs. As a result, the film’s melancholy but uplifting closing notes land that much more powerfully.



“Writing The Overstory quite literally changed my life, starting with where and how I live,” the author Richard Powers told the Chicago Review of Books. Before writing the book, Powers had been living and teaching in Palo Alto, between tech-centric Silicon Valley and California’s old-growth forests. An encounter with a giant redwood shook him; in a Guardian profile, he describes it as a kind of “religious conversion” that showed him his place in “a system of meaning that doesn’t begin and end with humans.” Powers then began work on the novel, and his research took him to Tennessee’s Great Smoky Mountains. Months later, he moved there to live deep in the woods, where “walking a trail has become as important to me as writing.”

The Overstory, which won the Pulitzer Prize in fiction on Monday, is as close as it gets to a founding text for Powers’s environmentalism. The novel follows nine characters—among them a Vietnam veteran, a young coding prodigy, and the last descendant of immigrant pioneers—whose close relationships with trees, lasting sometimes for generations, lead them to a deep appreciation of the world’s threatened forests. Nearly all the characters become activists in some form—five of them eventually come together in protest against a timber company—and throughout their personal transformations, the trees around them are so exquisitely rendered that they seem like characters themselves. The result is what the Pulitzer committee praises as “an ingeniously structured narrative” that approaches trees and the threats facing them with wonder, reverence, and an urgency that could be enough to change minds.

Powers’s novels can be categorized as part of “the grand realist tradition”; Nathaniel Rich, writing in the June 2018 issue of The Atlantic, noted the author’s penchant for critical documentation of contemporary society, exploring “our most complex social questions with originality, nuance, and an innate skepticism about dogma.” Powers himself, however, views his work as allegorical, and, indeed, The Overstory in particular has a mythic scope. The trees at its heart are godlike in scale, “as old as Jesus or Caesar”; over hundreds of years, they engage in social behaviors, communicating with one another through a vast network of roots. Human characters treat them as revered ancestors; after all, they share significant amounts of DNA with us. Fantastic as they might sound, all these qualities of trees are real. With The Overstory, Powers has not created a fable so much as translated reality into a compelling system of belief.

The Overstory fits well within the growing genre of “climate fiction,” which explores the effects of climate change and humans’ impact on the Earth. Although the term, coined by the former journalist Dan Bloom, has been in use for about a decade, it’s gained new prominence within the past few years as a number of recent works have tackled ever more pressing problems such as global warming, drought, and rising sea levels. Climate fiction is often speculative: Books such as Claire Vaye Watkins’s Gold Fame Citrus and Paolo Bacigalupi’s The Water Knife, for example, envision drought-stricken dystopias in the American West. But as other novels—such as C. Morgan Babst’s The Floating World, set in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina—demonstrate, the consequences of climate change don’t need to be imagined. They’re already very real.

Powers was a Pulitzer finalist in 2006 for his novel The Echo Maker, about a woman struggling to care for her brother after a brain injury, which won the National Book Award for fiction. That book, as Powers told the Los Angeles Review of Books last year, was also in part “a story of forgotten kinship” between humans and birds, whose intelligence is “deep and foreign enough to be invisible to many of us.” The Overstory takes this theme of connection with the natural world a step further, challenging people to recognize trees as creatures like themselves. It is the 12th novel Powers has published, and after a storied three-decade career, he seems to regard it as a kind of arrival, artistic and personal, at the place where he’s always been headed. “I just want to walk, look, listen, breathe, and write this same book,” he told the Chicago Review of Books, “again and again, from different aspects and elevations, with characters as old and large as I am able to imagine.”



Wyatt Cenac’s HBO show, Problem Areas, is funny—but it doesn’t do traditional comedy. Yes, it has an opening monologue with jokes. Yes, it has Cenac’s stand-up-esque, laid-back vibe. But, in many ways, Cenac veers closer to doing the news than in the parodies he did as a Daily Show correspondent.

Where Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert, and decades of anchors on Saturday Night Live’s Weekend Update have used newsy formats primarily as a means for delivering jokes, Cenac uses jokes as a way to attract audiences to journalism, in the vein of John Oliver and Samantha Bee. The bulk of his show is spent on deeply reported episodes that examine thorny issues in American society: Season 1 focused on policing; Season 2, which is out now, looks at education.

I spoke with Cenac about the show, the #MeToo movement, and “cancel culture.” Our conversation is lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

Lizzie O’Leary: I want to start with this description that GQ had about the show. They describe it as a “grown-up, slightly stoned Mr. Rogers’s Neighborhood.” How does that land with you?

Wyatt Cenac: I got no problem with that. That seems like good company to be in. And as long as I’m not the one who has to actually provide the weed, then yeah, it seems like great company to be in.

O’Leary: It strikes me that you somehow figured out how to get HBO to actually pay for the kind of policy journalism that isn’t getting paid for in newsrooms. How did you pull that off?

Cenac: I wish I knew. I think a lot of credit has to go to the executives at HBO for getting behind this idea and really championing [it]. When I brought it to them, I think it was something that, as an idea to me, felt interesting—to try to think about the local aspects of the national conversations we have, whether that’s something like policing or like education.

If we were on a network that had commercial breaks, it might be more challenging to do something like this. Especially if we ran on a network that didn’t let me curse.

O’Leary: The flip side of that is that you are looking at things not as a journalist, but as a comedian. In the second episode of this season, you devote a lot of time to the physical feel—the [bodily] experience—of going to school in a policed environment. And that is something that maybe someone who had spent 10 years covering education would zip past, because they are used to it. Why did you focus on that very physical experience of, This is what going to school and going through a metal detector feels like?

Cenac: A lot of that came from this idea of school safety and just hearing people talk about, “Well, we should arm teachers, and we should put more cops in schools, and we should do this.” And learning that the business of school safety is, I believe, a $3 billion business.

There are expos that happen every year … [Vox] went to one of those expos, and they had photographs from it. It’s a little alarming to see a hotel ballroom converted into a place where they’re offering up the latest in technology to basically put down a kid—a kid who is coming in with a weapon, but still a kid.

And so I think [we’re] seeing all that, but also thinking, Okay, but these things already exist in some schools, they exist in certain neighborhoods, and hearing people talk about the fact that [they] go to school and have to wait an hour on a cold day to go through a metal detector. Because I haven’t spent 10 years covering it, when I’m talking to people, I’m trying to learn as much as I can. If I’m hearing something, or the people who work on the show are hearing things, we’re kind of zeroing in on [them] like, As a person who is not familiar with this world, that feels weird to me, and I’m curious to know more about it.

O’Leary: You lost your dad when you were pretty young, and you’ve talked about it in your stand-up. You are clearly talking to kids in a bunch of these episodes who have been through trauma. A lot of comedians redirect trauma for laughs. It felt to me like, at least in these episodes, you were maybe being a little more open about that with them. Do you think your personal experiences have allowed you to talk to teenagers who’ve had crappy experiences in a way that someone like me wouldn’t?

Cenac: I don’t know. That’s a good question. I guess having lost a parent at a young age, I also know that that didn’t destroy me in a way that I couldn’t laugh, and I couldn’t find the humor in things. And so, in talking to anyone that I’ve gotten to talk to over the course of both these seasons, there are people who are dealing with real pain and real trauma, but they also have to live their lives every day. They also have to laugh and love and do all of those things. I try to tap into those places with them, as well as talking about the serious things. It feels like, Let’s keep this a casual-enough conversation that we can find the humor in things.

O’Leary: You have talked about your experience being uncomfortable on The Daily Show; Jon Stewart telling you to fuck off. Now that you’re the dude with all the power, has your thinking changed?

Cenac: Yeah. In the first season, I found myself definitely feeling the stress of being the one in charge and having to make decisions that felt stressful and uncomfortable. Having to let people go and hire people, to be aware of everyone’s feelings. Towards the end of [Problem Areas’ first] season, I actually emailed Jon, and we had an exchange about just being in charge. I wrote to him like, “I guess it’s a weird thing being on this side of it; I see your world a little more now.”

We had a lovely lunch in the city and hung out for a little bit. But it was an interesting thing, because to make those tough decisions—yes, I’m the one who’s in charge, but I am asking all of them to have faith in me and follow me down a path that they may not always agree with and understand. I’m asking a lot of them. I can’t do any of it without all of these people.

O’Leary: In Season 1, you spent some time with women who had been sexually assaulted or sexually harassed by cops. Obviously a lot of this has gone on in entertainment. Louis C.K. is out there trying to do sets right now. Should he get to do that?

Cenac: I feel like that’s one of those strange things where I don’t know the answer. I really don’t. I think there is opinion, and then there is the answer. There’s a part of this that feels like [it’s] the question to be asked [of] the owners of clubs that book him, and [of] the audiences that want to see him. Before Bill Cosby went to jail, he was still performing and doing shows. There’s an aspect of it that feels like in this very capitalist society that we live in, there are clearly people who want to pay to see Louis, or want to pay to see Bill Cosby, or want to pay to see a Kevin Spacey movie.

O’Leary: Well, there are people who will pay to see all sorts of things.

Cenac: Yes. And that’s where I say I don’t know. I feel like the question isn’t just, “Should this person get to write jokes and then go walk on a stage?” It’s also like, “What is the larger thing here?” Because the club puts him onstage, it feels like they’re complicit in perpetuating something. The audience that goes to see it, it feels like they are complicit in something. What is that sort of larger cultural conversation that we’re not having around that?

And then the other part of it that I’m confused by is just the society that we live in. In Season 1, we did an episode about restorative justice. There’s a part of me that wonders, Is there some sort of restorative justice model for someone like that?

The coverage is so focused on what he is doing next. Many of the women who were violated, they are comedians. They are writers. They are people with careers of their own. And I feel like we don’t direct the same attention to them. Like, when is Rebecca Corry onstage doing a stand-up special?

We’re still making it his story, and I’d be curious: How is someone like Rebecca—how does she process that onstage, and what joke is she telling? Is there a value to covering her and seeing, How does she take the stage again after all of this?

We have these conversations around this idea of “cancel culture.” But we don’t really talk about, like, “How do people make those things right?” How do they atone for those things? Instead what you see is: They disappear for a little, then they return. There’s maybe some outrage, but if they stick around long enough, the outrage subsides, and you just get used to them being there again.

I think we see it with a president who can say and do things that are completely offensive. People get outraged, and he then just pushes forward and doesn’t really face repercussions. He says something else terrible, pushes through, and it’s kind of like, “I’m not going to apologize.” What you’ve seen as the sort of rebuke to this idea of “cancel culture” is this idea of people saying, “I’m done apologizing, and I’m not going to apologize anymore.” And that just feels like, Okay, these two things are at loggerheads.

O’Leary: You were just on a show that I have a big crush on, Birds of North America.

Cenac: Oh, yes. It’s a great show.

O’Leary: What else do you watch?

Cenac: I haven’t had as much time to watch things this season. When we’re in season, my schedule becomes a little hectic. What do I watch? I’ve not watched Game of Thrones, which is obviously on the same network, I should get on that. But I never did.

O’Leary: I didn’t watch Game of Thrones. I was a late adopter, but then I committed.

Cenac: That’s the one weird moment of fame that I’ve had. I got to go to the Emmys. I went to the Emmys with The Daily Show. This must have been my second year at the show.

And so I wound up sitting at the award ceremony next to George R. R. Martin. And everyone else on the staff was a big Game of Thrones fan. Everyone was jealous, and I had nothing to talk to him about as it related to Game of Thrones. There were other people who saw this as a wasted opportunity. It was just like, “I know who you are, and I know that everyone who I work with is incredibly jealous right now that I’m just talking to you about what it’s like to live in New Jersey.”



This story contains spoilers for the episode “Smithereens” from Black Mirror’s fifth season. Read the rest of our show coverage here.

Black Mirror is, in short, a show about technology. Since debuting in 2011 (it moved to Netflix in 2016), the series has pondered the horrors and wonders of our connected world via stand-alone, near-feature-length episodes that touch on topics such as video gaming, virtual reality, online shaming, and internet dating. Some stories take place in the far future, others in a world mostly resembling our own. But something about “Smithereens,” which debuts on Netflix today as part of Season 5, feels unusual for Black Mirror. Yes, the installment is about a fictional social-media app and a nightmarish scenario that unfolds, but it seems like it could’ve been pulled from today’s headlines.

There’s only the barest hint of surrealism to “Smithereens,” a grim tale that suffers from many of the flaws that plagued Black Mirror’s very mixed previous season. More than anything, the episode is a story about demanding accountability from the all-consuming apps and all-powerful tech companies that fill our lives, and how futile that process can be. “Smithereens” gets in a few interesting jabs, but Charlie Brooker’s script is hampered by how thin the plot is, how long it takes for the action to get going, and how simplistic the big mystery turns out to be.

The episode follows Chris (played by Andrew Scott), an Uber driver who parks his vehicle outside the office of the social-media company Smithereen every day, looking to pick up a particular sort of customer. After one trip proves abortive—the person visiting the office was just meeting up with a friend—Chris spots Jaden (Damson Idris), a well-dressed, wheelie-bag-toting Smithereen employee on his way to the airport. Chris picks him up, takes him to a remote location, and sticks a gun in his face, only then realizing that Jaden is actually an intern just a week on the job. “Modern fucking companies! Everyone looks so fucking young! How is anybody supposed to have a sense of the fucking hierarchy?” Chris screams.

Jaden might be an intern, but he’s on the payroll, and that’s enough for Chris’s ultimate purpose: to hold a Smithereen employee hostage and demand to talk to Billy Bauer (Topher Grace), the company’s founder and CEO. Chris makes this request around 20 minutes into the episode; he doesn’t explain why he’s doing it until about 35 minutes later. In between is a lot of stalling, much of it centered around classic hostage tropes (the panicked cops, the slick negotiator, the snipers looking for a shot through their scopes). “Smithereens” mines some tension from its basic “man with a gun” premise, but this is Black Mirror—I kept waiting for a twist that never really arrived.

The most incisive parts of Brooker’s script follow the ways in which Smithereen’s vast data-mining operation begins to envelop Chris as the company tries to figure out what he really wants from Bauer. At every turn, the social-media mavens are a step ahead of the cops in unraveling Chris’s motivation; they even provide helpful, albeit bland, tips via text message on how to best communicate with him. But Black Mirror has made a better version of this kind of episode, in which a news story begins to spiral out of control online—“The National Anthem,” the bleak entry that kicked off the whole show back in 2011. “Smithereens” is drab by comparison.

Scott throws his whole heart into the big, emotional monologue at the end of the episode explaining what caused him to snap (an errant phone notification from the Smithereen app caused him to crash his car, killing his wife). He does, of course, get on the phone with Bauer, who’s in the middle of a ludicrous-looking meditative retreat and is generally styled to look like Twitter’s Jack Dorsey. Grace portrays Bauer as a blissed-out, largely inept chatterbox who just wants to complain to Chris about how much the original idea for the app has gotten out of hand, but the takeaway from their confrontation is that fixing Smithereen’s flaws is impossible.

Scott’s committed lead performance (the actor most recently played the “hot priest” on Fleabag’s second season) kept me at least interested throughout. But “Smithereens” doesn’t add up to much. It’s the only definite flop of Black Mirror’s new run; every other entry, including the special Christmas episode “Bandersnatch” (which was initially intended to be part of Season 5), has something to dig into. “Smithereens” exists mostly as an impotent cry of rage, which might be easier to take if it wasn’t well over an hour long.

Chris can rail at Bauer all he wants, but he knows it won’t give him much satisfaction beyond a general sense of unburdening. Bauer can try to explain why his invention has become so addictive and overwhelming, but he barely understands the phenomenon himself at this point. “Smithereens” is a tale of two totally adrift people unable to continue living in an interconnected world. That feeling of helplessness is a fine starting point for a Black Mirror episode, but it shouldn’t be the grand finale.



“All RRRRRRight!”

It’s January 2018, and Dr. Ruth is visiting the place where her fame began, roughly 40 years ago: a radio studio in New York City. This time around, though, she isn’t the host of the show, dispensing advice about sex and relationships with candid words and a signature accent (“a cross between Henry Kissinger and Minnie Mouse,” The Wall Street Journal put it). Now she is the guest. Her legs dangling lightly from a chair that is, like most chairs, far too big for her—she is 4 foot 7—the woman who spent years answering other people’s questions is now answering some about herself.

“We are back,” her host says into the studio’s microphone. “This is Midday on WNYC. I’m Jonathan Capehart, and I am speaking with the iconic, world-renowned sex and relationship therapist Dr. Ruth Westheimer. In her latest book—”

“Jonathan, wait!” his interviewee interrupts.

“Yes, ma’am!” he replies.

“I would say the word sex with more emotion.”

“Oh!” he says.

“Say that word sex as if you really mean it. With some warmth! With”—she thrusts up her hands—“some excitement! With some aRRRRRRousal!”

“Start again.”

“Okay, yes, ma’am,” Capehart says, grinning. “Um, I am speaking with the iconic, world-renowned”—he adds a newly guttural emphasis to his delivery—“seeeeeex and relaaaaationship therapist Dr. Ruth Westheimer.”

He looks over at Dr. Ruth. “How’s that?”

“That,” she says, “was wonderful.”

A century ago, Edward Carpenter, the poet and activist, wondered, “Why, we may ask, should people be afraid of rousing passions which, after all, are the great driving forces of human life?” It was a question about religion; it was a question about politics; it was a question that never got fully answered. In American culture, instead, sex has existed in a kind of haze: It has been everywhere, and yet, in a more meaningful way, it has been nowhere. It has often been discussed, when it has been discussed at all, in language that is coded and furtive, its warm truths concealed under a network of strategically desiccated fig leaves. It has been rendered as images that flicker on distant screens. It has been outsourced to marketers who have promptly converted it into a sales proposition. It has been decided on our behalf.

That has been changing, gradually, in part because of the idea Dr. Ruth spent decades impressing on the public through her radio show, and her several TV shows, and her several books, and many of the other outgrowths of a one-woman media empire: Sex, she insisted, should be a topic of public conversation. And it should be given, when it is talked about, the basic courtesy of blunt language. Her inaugural radio program, Sexually Speaking, launched in 1981, was premised on the notion that the tentative new freedoms promised by a sexual revolution might bring with them tentative new questions. She set about answering them, call by call: queries about, among many other things, erectile dysfunction (don’t worry, Dr. Ruth would say; that’s easily solved), about clitoral orgasms (don’t stress; they simply take patience), about the G-spot (don’t bother; it doesn’t exist). Toys? Boredom? Is it normal to—?

There is no such thing as “normal,” Dr. Ruth would interrupt, emphatically, empathetically, again and again, until it became a refrain. Her age (she was born in 1928) and her accent (German, with a hint of Hebrew) suggested that she might have a particularly profound comprehension of how notions of “normalcy” could be made into weapons of cruelty. She had no patience for sanctimony, and no time for people who preached compassion but failed to practice it. Sexually Speaking was a lighthearted show with a serious implication: The line between sexual freedoms and freedoms of the other variety is not as stark as it might seem. A Ph.D. rather than a medical doctor, Dr. Ruth refused to take refuge in euphemism. She found clarity in the haze. There are so many things, her life had taught her, that are more important than politeness.

At the height of her fame, in the 1980s and ’90s, Dr. Ruth was a frequent guest on late-night talk shows, and her visits would often go like this: Perched on the given show’s couch, legs dangling, she’d talk about vaginas and vibrators and anatomy and autonomy, with unapologetic warmth and excitement and aRRRRRRousal, and her interviewer, very often a man, very often burying his face in his hands in mock agony, would be brought into the bluntness along with her. So would the audience. Her utter lack of embarrassment made a claim that was as radical as it is obvious: Sex should not be a source of shame to anyone, because sex is something that belongs to everyone. “I am going to make you say ‘vagina’ and ‘clitoris,’ because I always hear you talk about ‘penis,’” Dr. Ruth once told Arsenio Hall. It was a joke that was also an argument.

A scene in Ask Dr. Ruth, Ryan White’s vibrant documentary celebrating her life and work, finds the film’s subject, in the days before her 90th birthday, revisiting a diary she kept when she was a girl. One of the entries mentions the book Letters for Young Girls, a primer written by a physician for purposes of sex education. Its lessons impressed on the young Dr. Ruth not bashfulness, but wonder. “Everything in nature is so fantastically well organized,” she wrote, in German, in the diary. “One can’t possibly think that anything about it is dirty.”

It is a telling detail—the child, anticipating the path of the adult—but White does not linger on it. The central fact of the film, instead, is one of the central facts of Dr. Ruth’s life: The girl who was born, in Frankfurt, as Karola Ruth Siegel—the only child of Julius and Irma Siegel—left her family when she was 10, when they sent her to live in a repurposed orphanage in the Swiss Alps as part of the Kindertransport effort. The separation saved her life; it also meant that she would spend the years between girlhood and womanhood not knowing where her family was, or whether they were still alive. Only after the war ended did she learn that both of her parents had been murdered in the Holocaust, her father at Auschwitz, her mother at a location unknown.

“There were many years that I thought that if I had stayed in Germany, I could have saved my family,” Dr. Ruth told me when I met her recently. “Nonsense. I wouldn’t be alive. You would have never met me.”

Ask Dr. Ruth—which, after screening at Sundance this January, premieres in theaters in early May and will stream on Hulu this summer—is part of a growing subgenre: documentary appreciations of people, such as Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Fred Rogers, who were ahead of their time. White was drawn to her as a subject not only because, he told me, “I’m a child of the ’80s and ’90s, so I grew up on Dr. Ruth,” but also because of her work as a champion of those who are marginalized on the basis of sex. Dr. Ruth has been steadfast in her support of reproductive freedom: “While I wish there were no abortion,” she writes in her 2015 memoir, “I am strongly in favor of women having control over their own bodies.” She has also been an AIDS activist—one of the first celebrities to advocate for the people who were falling prey to the disease, fighting the stigmas that turned a cruel epidemic into an even more gutting kind of tragedy. Sexual judgment, the writer Wendell Berry wrote, is the “lowest form of hatred”; it is also, of course, an exceedingly common form of it.

One of the remarkable elements of Ask Dr. Ruth is that, though it is often a film about pain—of a woman who is both a survivor of the Holocaust and an orphan of it; of people who have been punished simply for being themselves—it is, on the whole, a joy to watch. That is largely because Dr. Ruth herself is a joy to watch. (“Why keep publishing books at 89?” an off-camera voice asks her at one point. “What a stupid question,” she replies, grinning. “Next question.”) Dr. Ruth has been, variously, a daughter, a mourner, a refugee, a sniper, a maid, a wife, a mother, a grandmother, an educator, and a celebrity who rendered David Letterman speechless with stories about unconventional uses of onion rings. The film joins those identities, and others, in a way that reads as coherent but not overdetermined. It is aided in that by a subject who is, after all, a therapist—a professional connector of life’s disheveled dots. “By not having parents since the age of 10,” she says in the film, “I was very aware of the importance of being touched. Of being loved. So that’s one of the reasons that I became so interested in the issues of the family, and of relationships, and eventually of sexuality.”

A lesson that endures from her childhood, Dr. Ruth told me, is the idea that “you have to be educated, because education nobody can take from you.” While she has taken in knowledge, she has also studiously amplified it: She has taught courses on sexuality at Princeton and Yale, and still teaches at Hunter College and Teachers College at Columbia, where she earned her Ph.D. She has written academic papers. She has produced her own documentaries. Those efforts are of a piece with the less obviously instructive elements of her output: The sex-themed board game. The VHS tape. The line of low-alcohol wine (just the right percentage, the pitch goes, to loosen inhibitions). The ads for various sodas, and for Mr. Peanut, and for Herbal Essences body wash, and for LifeStyles prophylactics (“Do you use condoms? Goot!”).

It probably did not occur to whoever coined the adage “Sex sells” that the person who would take the idea to its logical conclusion would be a “bite-sized sex therapist” correcting the record about G-spots. But to watch Ask Dr. Ruth is also to come away appreciating the sense in her celebrity. “A lesson taught with humor is one retained,” goes the Talmud; here is that wisdom, applied to discussions of topics that aren’t typically afforded the freedom of open air. At lectures and other public events, Dr. Ruth will often break the ice by promising that the people who summon the courage to ask her a question will have “good sex for the rest of their lives,” and the laughter that results will serve a practical purpose: Don’t worry. Don’t stress. During last year’s interview at WNYC, a woman—Michelle, from Brooklyn—called in to the show. “I was a teenager in the ’80s listening to you on the radio,” she told Dr. Ruth, “and there was a lot of shame around sex. And your sex-positive, nonjudgmental perspective saved my life … So I just want to thank you—you’re an angel.”

“Well, I like to hear that! I accept to be an angel,” Dr. Ruth said, grinning. “I’m a Jewish angel.”

You could trace the moment Ruth K. Westheimer became Dr. Ruth to the time she started going by her middle name, Ruth, after the war; or to the day she married Fred Westheimer, in 1961; or to the day she got her Ph.D., in 1970. But you can trace it most immediately to 1981—the year that other radio station, WYNY, took a gamble on a sex therapist with a Teutonic speaking voice and a no-nonsense brand of empathy. She was qualified for the job in part because, earlier in her career, she had taken a position at Planned Parenthood in New York, preparing women to become family-planning counselors. Patients and others at the clinics she visited wouldn’t simply talk about sex, she says; they would also ask questions about it—precisely the kind she would later field on the air. At the time, she wasn’t sure how to answer. “I thought, These people are crazy—all they talk about is sex!” she told me. “Talk about the weather, not about sex! … And then 48 hours later, I said, Whoops! What an interesting subject!”

To learn more about it, she applied, and was admitted, to the postdoctoral program run by the famous sex therapist Helen Singer Kaplan. And then, in 1981: WYNY reached out to the program, asking for a researcher to do a brief segment about sexuality on its air. While her fellow academics balked, Dr. Ruth agreed to do the show. Sexually Speaking was broadcast very late on Sunday evening; despite the constraint, it was almost an overnight sensation. “Grandma Freud,” as Dr. Ruth soon became known, was an expert who happened also to be a natural entertainer, and her guiding principle—There is no such thing as “normal”—proved a source of liberation both to callers of the show and to the many more who listened in. “She can seemingly say things on the air that no one else can these days,” The New York Times marveled in 1985, “even on Sunday nights, when men of the cloth are preaching hellfire and brimstone up and down the radio dial. This could be because she is short and sweet and takes her subject seriously.”

The show soon expanded to two hours, 10 p.m. to midnight on those late Sunday evenings; its host began calling herself, simply, “Dr. Ruth.” And she became, in short order, ubiquitous. Her son Joel, a college student when Sexually Speaking began to take off, recalls the night that he heard “my mother’s voice from eight different radios scattered around the dorm. And I was just completely surprised—I was like, Mom?”

The radio show led to her first TV show, Good Sex! With Dr. Ruth Westheimer, in which she interviewed a series of the time’s A-list celebrities—among them Patti LaBelle, Fran Drescher, Cyndi Lauper, Isaac Hayes, and Burt Reynolds. The show led, as well, to her first book (Dr. Ruth’s Guide to Good Sex), and to a second (First Love: A Young People’s Guide to Sexual Information), and to a third (Dr. Ruth’s Guide for Married Lovers), and soon to many more. For a woman who, on arriving in New York, had worked as a housekeeper for $1 a day—and a woman who had taught herself English with the help of romance novels (“because I always wanted to read to the end to know what happened”)—it was a remarkable reversal. But it was also a logical one: There was a market for treatments of sex that prioritized truth over timidity. And there was, in an even broader sense, a need for those treatments. Why be coy about reality?

One of the best moments of Ask Dr. Ruth is an exchange, set at her kitchen table in Washington Heights, between Dr. Ruth and her granddaughter, Leora. “Omi … are you a feminist?” the young woman asks the older one. “No!” comes the emphatic reply. “Why?” Leora says, laughing in mock frustration—they have clearly had this conversation before.

“I’m old-fashioned! I’m a square!”

“Do you agree that men and women should have equal rights?”

“Yes.”

“Equal pay?”

“Absolutely, equal pay.”

“What about abortion?” Leora continues. “Should women be able to decide if—”

“Absolutely. I said that already.”

“Okay, so you’re a feminist!”

Dr. Ruth shakes her head. Soon Miriam, Leora’s mother, joins the conversation. “In our language, you would very much be called a feminist,” Miriam says, mediating between the generations. “What you resist is the activist protesting in, you know—”

“Burning bras,” Leora says.

“Yeah!” Dr. Ruth concedes. “I don’t want you to walk around burning bRRRRas.”

Their confusion is understandable. Dr. Ruth’s long career suggests a feminist mind at work. You could read Sexually Speaking, with its bold, bald language, as a mass-mediated form of consciousness-raising: What were those callers doing—and what was their ad hoc therapist doing along with them—if not spreading awareness through the sharing of stories? “I’ve never heard women tell the truth about sex before in public in my life,” Gloria Steinem said of the show, with a note of awe. And as Dr. Ruth’s celebrity took on an atmospheric quality, it summoned the power of pop culture to change myths and minds. But it also followed in the broad intellectual tradition of works such as Audre Lorde’s Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power; Shulamith Firestone’s The Dialectic of Sex; the Boston Women’s Health Book Collective’s Our Bodies, Ourselves; and Anne Koedt’s The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm—the essay that introduced many men, and for that matter many women, to the mere existence of the clitoris. (It was published in 1970.)

Those works fought for frankness. They understood that equality would not be possible in a world that treated men’s bodies as obvious and women’s bodies as mysterious. They resisted an environment in which, as Dr. Ruth puts it, people “were still believing that not only don’t you talk about sex, but women really don’t enjoy it.” (A male caller to her show: “If a woman is frigid, what happens if you—” Dr. Ruth cuts him off. “Whoa! Hold it! That word you can’t say on my program. There’s no more ‘frigid woman.’”)

It is rare to see a celebrity who is also so deeply humane. Joan Rivers called her “the goddess of good sex,” and the good was the radical part: Dr. Ruth emphasized pleasure and consent and respect—respect above all—during a time when those ideas were seeking purchase in American culture. They still are. “Don’t just sit there and suffer,” she advised. “Don’t fake it. Don’t be unhappy or frustrated, but do something about it.”

The first, crucial step: Talk about it. Frankly, openly, unabashedly. Language leads as much as it follows. It shapes the world even as it responds to it. Good Sex! began with the familiar warning “This television program contains explicit sexual language and may not be suitable for all audiences.” The message was revealing both because it was so dully perfunctory and also because it was so thoroughly wrong. “Explicit sexual language,” as Dr. Ruth deploys it, is not a threat; it is the point. It is the gift she has given to all those who have watched and read and listened and learned as she has repeatedly refused to be embarrassed. It hints at all the good that can come when people, finally, can say that word sex as if they really mean it.

1. The Disappearance

At 12:42 a.m. on the quiet, moonlit night of March 8, 2014, a Boeing 777-200ER operated by Malaysia Airlines took off from Kuala Lumpur and turned toward Beijing, climbing to its assigned cruising altitude of 35,000 feet. The designator for Malaysia Airlines is MH. The flight number was 370. Fariq Hamid, the first officer, was flying the airplane. He was 27 years old. This was a training flight for him, the last one; he would soon be fully certified. His trainer was the pilot in command, a man named Zaharie Ahmad Shah, who at 53 was one of the most senior captains at Malaysia Airlines. In Malaysian style, he was known by his first name, Zaharie. He was married and had three adult children. He lived in a gated development. He owned two houses. In his first house he had installed an elaborate Microsoft flight simulator.

"It’s not true that no one needs you anymore.”

These words came from an elderly woman sitting behind me on a late-night flight from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C. The plane was dark and quiet. A man I assumed to be her husband murmured almost inaudibly in response, something to the effect of “I wish I was dead.”

Again, the woman: “Oh, stop saying that.”

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

I didn’t mean to eavesdrop, but couldn’t help it. I listened with morbid fascination, forming an image of the man in my head as they talked. I imagined someone who had worked hard all his life in relative obscurity, someone with unfulfilled dreams—perhaps of the degree he never attained, the career he never pursued, the company he never started.

Arguments before the United States Court of Appeals are usually dry, esoteric, and nerdy. What would it take to make one go viral? This week, in a clip that launched a million angry Facebook posts, we found out. It took a lawyer for the United States telling a panel of incredulous Ninth Circuit judges that it is “safe and sanitary” to confine immigrant children in facilities without soap or toothbrushes and to make them sleep on concrete floors under bright lights.

This assertion generated widespread outrage. Sarah Fabian, the senior attorney in the Department of Justice’s Office of Immigration Litigation who uttered it, was instantly excoriated online. As fate would have it, the clip of her argument went viral at the same time as a new wave of reports of brutal and inhumane conditions at immigrant confinement centers. It also immediately followed the raucous debate over Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez referring to the confinement centers as concentration camps. The juxtaposition suggested, misleadingly, that the Trump administration was explicitly justifying the worst sorts of child mistreatment we were seeing on the news.

In the faint predawn light, the ship doesn’t look unusual. It is one more silhouette looming pier-side at Naval Base San Diego, a home port of the U.S. Pacific Fleet. And the scene playing out in its forward compartment, as the crew members ready themselves for departure, is as old as the Navy itself. Three sailors in blue coveralls heave on a massive rope. “Avast!” a fourth shouts. A percussive thwack announces the pull of a tugboat—and 3,000 tons of warship are under way.

To hear more feature stories, see our full list or get the Audm iPhone app. 

But now the sun is up, and the differences start to show.

Most obvious is the ship’s lower contour. Built in 2014 from 30 million cans’ worth of Alcoa aluminum, Littoral Combat Ship 10, the USS Gabrielle Giffords, rides high in the water on three separate hulls and is powered like a jet ski—that is, by water-breathing jets instead of propellers. This lets it move swiftly in the coastal shallows (or “littorals,” in seagoing parlance), where it’s meant to dominate. Unlike the older ships now gliding past—guided-missile cruisers, destroyers, amphibious transports—the littoral combat ship was built on the concept of “modularity.” There’s a voluminous hollow in the ship’s belly, and its insides can be swapped out in port, allowing it to set sail as a submarine hunter, minesweeper, or surface combatant, depending on the mission.

Americans often lament the rise of “extreme partisanship,” but this is a poor description of political reality: Far from increasing, Americans’ attachment to their political parties has considerably weakened over the past years. Liberals no longer strongly identify with the Democratic Party and conservatives no longer strongly identify with the Republican Party.

What is corroding American politics is, specifically, negative partisanship: Although most liberals feel conflicted about the Democratic Party, they really hate the Republican Party. And even though most conservatives feel conflicted about the Republican Party, they really hate the Democratic Party.

America’s political divisions are driven by hatred of an out-group rather than love of the in-group. The question is: why?

At least 2,000 children have now been forcibly separated from their parents by the United States government. Their stories are wrenching. Antar Davidson, a former youth-care worker at an Arizona shelter, described to the Los Angeles Times children “huddled together, tears streaming down their faces,” because they believed that their parents were dead. Natalia Cornelio, an attorney with the Texas Human Rights Project, told CNN about a Honduran mother whose child had been ripped away from her while she was breastfeeding. “Inside an old warehouse in South Texas, hundreds of children wait in a series of cages created by metal fencing,” the Associated Press reported. “One cage had 20 children inside.”

On Monday night, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez declared in an Instagram video that “the United States is running concentration camps on our southern border.” The following morning, Liz Cheney tweeted, “Please @AOC do us all a favor and spend just a few minutes learning some actual history. 6 million Jews were exterminated in the Holocaust. You demean their memory and disgrace yourself with comments like this.” After that, the fight was on.

On its face, the fight was about using concentration camp outside the context of the Holocaust. In a subsequent tweet, Ocasio-Cortez linked to an Esquire article noting that the term pre-dates World War II. It quoted the historian Andrea Pitzer, who defines concentration camp as the “mass detention of civilians without trial.” To Ocasio-Cortez’s critics, this was too cute by half. Whatever the term’s historical origins or technical meaning, in American popular discourse concentration camp evokes the Holocaust. By using the term, they argued, the representative from New York was equating Donald Trump’s immigration policies with Nazi genocide, whether she admitted it or not.

About 65 million years ago, shortly after the time of the dinosaurs, a new critter popped up on the evolutionary scene. This “scampering animal,” as researchers described it, was likely small, ate bugs, and had a furry tail. It looked, according to artistic renderings, like an especially aggressive New York City rat. And it had a placenta, an organ that grows deep into the maternal body in order to nourish the fetus during pregnancy.

The rodentlike thing would become the common ancestor of the world’s placental mammals, with descendants that include whales, bats, dogs, and humans, among many other species. And today, the placenta might hold the key to one of the most enduring mysteries in human medicine: Why do women suffer much higher rates of autoimmune disease than men do?

Updated at 12:07 p.m. on June 19, 2019

Like most other colleges across the country, Newbury College, a small, private liberal-arts school in Brookline, Massachusetts, held classes through the end of this past spring semester and then bid farewell to cap-and-gown-wearing seniors. But unlike almost every other college, those classes, and that farewell, were the school’s last: Newbury officially ceased operations at the end of May.

One of the first sources to publicly confirm the long-rumored closure was the president’s blog, where the news was shared last December. “It is with a heavy heart,” the school’s president, Joseph Chillo, wrote, “that I announce our intention to commence the closing of Newbury College, this institution we love so dearly.”

There’s a moment about 15 minutes into the first episode of Years and Years that made me gasp at its audacity, its prescience, its visual horror. The new six-part series from the British writer Russell T. Davies (Doctor Who, A Very English Scandal) charts the life of the Lyons family over the course of 15 years, starting in 2019 and ending in 2034. It’s a kitchen-sink saga that barrels its way through births and marriages and betrayals, but also through the near-future. In 2024, Stephen Lyons (played by Rory Kinnear), a financial adviser, is at home with his wife, Celeste (T’nia Miller), both rushing their way through the morning routine. When the camera turns to their teenage daughter Bethany (Lydia West), her face isn’t recognizably human. Instead, she looks like a 3-D version of a Snapchat puppy, with vast cartoon eyes, wagging pink ears, and a brown snout. When she talks, her voice is grotesquely distorted, a robotic hallucination of a child’s cadence. “I might have to start limiting filter time,” Celeste says in the same exasperated, noncommittal way that you might think, I really should spend less time on Twitter.



